Peraluminous (P.I.<1) and peralkaline (P.I.>1) rhyolites from SE Lake Chad consisted of quartz, alkali feldspar and oxides–hydroxides phenocrysts, display negative Eu anomaly. F-arfvedsonite, augite–hedenbergite, aegirine and aegirine-augite are present in peralkaline rhyolites. The peralkaline and peraluminous rhyolitic magmas of the SE Lake Chad derive likely from the same source, according to their coexistence on the same volcano (Hadjer Bigli); their similar Zr/Nb, Zr/Hf ratios and their linear trends established in Zr vs Nb, Zr vs Ta and Zr vs Y diagrams, which linked to removal of successive batches of magma from a mantle source or to different degrees of partial melting. These magmas generated from the partial melting model of the underplated mantle, which would have induced the intrusion of crustal materials, triggering the hydrothermal reactions. Although, the high Zr amounts are not related to bulk assimilation of partially melted crustal materials.The rhyolitic outcrops of Hadjer el Hamis, Hadjer Bigli and Hadjer al Hider overhang the sedimentary units of the SE Lake Chad ( The undersaturated rocks, with intermediate to mafic compositions, are absent around the rhyolitic volcanoes of Dandi. Generally, both felsic (silicic) rocks and mafic rocks associated with intermediate rocks in the same domain ( In this paper, we present a detailed fieldwork, petrographical study, new mineralogical and geochemical data of rhyolites from the SE of Lake Chad. Furthermore, we present the relationship between peraluminous and coexisting peralkaline rhyolites. Among the aims of the study, we focused on understanding magma composition, the role of hydrothermal fluid to generate aluminous and peralkaline rhyolites, the cause of the high-Zr concentration and their significance for the processes of petrogenesis of rhyolites from Lake Chad. Lake Chad basin was filled from early Cambrian by continental deposits of clays, kaolinite and sandstones ( The Late Cretaceous peralkaline rhyolites (69.4 ± 0.4 Ma; Previous petrological studies of the SE Lake Chad rhyolites have mainly been concentrated on peralkaline-type, which are the main silicic volcanic rocks; and not to the coexisting aluminous and peralkaline rhyolites. Nowaday, the coexistence in the same domain of peralkaline and aluminous rocks is strongly debated in order to find their genetic relationship ( Peraluminous and peralkaline rhyolites from the SE Lake Chad sampled on rocky slopes and/or in working quarries at the flanks of Hadjer el Hamis, Hadjer Bigli and Hadjer al Hider volcanoes. According to The petrography of samples were determined by optical microscopy (OM) using an Olympus BX60 binocular microscope at the “Instituto de Geociências, Universidade de Brasília (Brazil)”. The superprobe JEOL JXA-8230, Electron Probe Microanalyser of the same University was used for back-scattered electron (BSE) images, qualitative and quantitative analyses for the mineral phases (clinopyroxene, amphibole, feldspar, Fe–Ti oxides, hydroxides and apatite). The operating conditions included an accelerating voltage of 15 kV and a probe current of 1.08 × 10 Whole-rock samples were crushed to fine powder in a “Siebtechnik” mill equiped with two agate jars at the “Instituto de Geociências, Universidade de Brasilia (Brazil)”. Representative electron microprobe analyses of whole-rock major and trace elements analyses were performed using respectively ICP-ES and ICP-MS methods at the Acme Analytical Laboratories, Chile. Analytical detection limits (D.L) were less than 0.05 wt.% for the major elements and less than 20 ppm for the trace elements. The analysis for total carbon and sulphur were performed at the low analytical detection limits (0.02 wt.%). Total loss on ignition (L.O.I) was determined gravimetrically after heating or sintering at 1000 °C. The sample D3 from Hadjer Bigli, which characterized by high amount of loss on ignition (LOI = 2.5) straddles the border of the rhyolite field ( Rhyolites from Hadjer el Hamis are both dark green and grey, with abundant feldspar phenocrysts in a groundmass of fine-grained dark and light minerals. Indeed, samples are porphyritic with partly fluidal groundmass, marked by oriented microlites. Hadjer el Hamis rhyolites contain phenocrysts of quartz (up to 2.5 mm), alkali feldspar (∼3.5 mm), amphibole (∼1.5 mm), clinopyroxene (∼1 mm) and Fe–Ti oxides (∼1 mm), scattered in the groundmass, consisting of alkali feldspar, amphibole and Fe–Ti oxides microlites, enclosed by a thin glassy phase. This groundmass is very finely crystallized. Quartz phenocrysts are euhedral to subhedral, with corrosion gulfs. Euhedral and subhedral feldspar phenocrysts are irregular, colourless to yellow-brown, with spongy structure. In the interstices left by these phenocrysts occur microlites of feldspar and Fe–Ti oxides. The dark greenish amphibole phenocrysts are sometimes pseudomorphosed or enclosed with fine-grained Fe–Ti oxides. Apatite microcrysts are included in amphibole. Clinopyroxene phenocrysts are green or brown, with anhedral to subhedral shape, overgrown and partly replaced by Fe–Ti oxides. These rhyolites display quartz and alkali feldspar phenocrysts set in an altered devitrified glassy groundmass. In thin section, these rocks are characterized by a strongly developed, micropoikilitic texture along with more or less rounded, partly resorbed quartz phenocrysts. In these rocks, some sections display micrographic texture, probably a characteristic of the simultaneously crystallization of quartz and K-feldspar from the silicic magma. Phenocrysts of quartz (∼1 mm), feldspar (up to 1.2 mm) and amphibole (∼1.5 mm) are anhedral to subhedral and scarce in the sample D3. Phenocrysts of amphibole are dark brownish, strongly destabilized and partly replaced by Fe–Ti oxides. In the glassy groundmass, microlites of quartz and feldspar are scattered. The sample D5, display elongated and destabilized dark greenish clinopyroxene and amphibole microlites scattered throughout of groundmass and often in the interstices, left by the aggregated phenocrysts of feldspar (∼2.5 mm long) or in the gulf of corrosion of quartz. The greenish dark rhyolitic (F1, F2, F12) dykes from Hadjer Bigli are microlithic porphyritic, with quartz (up to 2 mm long), alkali feldspars (∼1.5 mm long), green euhedral amphibole (up to 2.2 mm), clinopyroxene (∼0.8 mm) and Fe–Ti oxides (∼0.9 mm) phenocrysts, in a groundmass consisting of alkali feldspar, amphibole, clinopyroxene, apatite and Fe–Ti oxides microlites. The phenocrysts of quartz and alkali feldspar are euhedral or subhedral and sometimes agglomerated with amphibole. Fe–Ti oxides and apatite are included in the green amphibole phenocrysts. The sample F2, is dominated by tiny grains of alkali feldspar, resorbed quartz and green clinopyroxene, commonly forming sparse clusters in the groundmass. The thin sections of the grey rhyolites (samples F13, F16), are characterized by the micropoikilithic texture, with spherulitic and micrographic tendence. The elongated clinopyroxene and amphibole microlites are dark greenish scattered throughout weakly glassy groundmass. The groundmass consists of spherulitic growths of fibrous quartz and K-feldspar, characterizing likely the simultaneous crystallization of these phases. Subhedral to euhedral phenocrysts (∼2.5 mm long) of quartz and K-feldspar are scattered in the groundmass. The sample F6 (another grey rhyolite) show on the contrary, microlithic porphyric texture. The euhedral to subhedral phenocrysts of devitrified quartz (up to 1 mm long) and destabilized K-feldspar (up to 1.2 mm long) are scattered in the finely crystallized matrix. The matrix is characterized by the presence of tiny grains of alkali feldspar, quartz, green clinopyroxene, Fe–Ti oxides and scarce irregular patches of glass. The Hadjer al Hider rhyolites are dark green, quite similar to those from Hadjer el Hamis; with phorphyritic texture and fluidal groundmass. The porphyritic rhyolites from Hadjer al Hider consisted of quartz (up to 1.4 mm long), alkali feldspar (up to 3.1 mm long), clinopyroxene, amphibole (up to 2.3 mm long), Fe–Ti oxides (∼0.8 mm) phenocrysts, which are enclosed by a glassy groundmass of amphibole, clinopyroxene, apatite and Fe–Ti oxides microlites. Feldspar and Fe–Ti oxides microlites fill the corrosion gulfs of quartz. The amphibole phenocrysts, with green and pleochroic colour, are scattered in the groundmass. These phenocrysts show sometimes iron-bearing minerals (oxides and hydroxides) in a destabilized reddish brown to yellow core. Clinopyroxene phenocrysts are euhedral to subhedral, green or reddish-brown, and surrounded by Fe–Ti oxides microlites. Clinopyroxene, amphibole and Fe–Ti oxides microlites are often included in the phenocrysts of alkali feldspar. The compositions of clinopyroxene ( In the rhyolitic dykes from Hadjer Bigli, Na Amphibole phenocrysts have arfvedsonite compositions (mg# < 0.5; Al In the Hadjer Bigli dykes, fluoro-arfvedsonite crystals occur with similar features (Na Alkali feldspar phenocryts, with sanidine compositions (K Ilmenite crystals (TiO Fluoro-apatite crystals ( Major-elements diagrams ( A progressive REE (except Eu), Rb, Zr, Nb, Y and Th enrichment ( Apart from the sample D3, which has high Zr/Nb ratio (Zr/Nb: 10.1); overall, peralkaline and peraluminous rhyolites from the SE Lake Chad show the similar Zr/Nb ratios, just below 7 (Zr/Nb: 6.4–6.9). However, the values of Zr/Hf ratio are roughly constant and similar for both peralkaline and peraluminous lavas (38.1–42.6). Primitive mantle-normalized ( Rb/Ba, Rb/Sr and Ga/Al ratios of Lake Chad rhyolites (peralkaline and peraluminous) increase from Hadjer al Hider (1.1–1.2; 0.13–0.18; 4.81–4.89 respectively) to Hadjer el Hamis (2.4–4.2; 0.20–0.27; 4.8–5.0 respectively), then to Hadjer Bigli (14.8–47.5; 2.3–27.4; 6.7–13.2). The alkali feldspars with intermediate compositions (anorthoclase–Na-sanidine) in the SE Lake Chad rhyolites show evidence for hypersolvus crystallization conditions ( Low The increasing Rb, Rb/Sr, Rb/Ba, Ga/Al and Nb with decreasing Ba, Sr from the Hadjer al Hider to Hadjer el Hamis, then to the Hadjer Bigli, show likely implication of the fractional crystallization. Arfvedsonite (K, Ba, Ti), ilmenite (Ti), apatite (P) and alkali feldspar (K, Sr, Eu) crystallization in the rhyolitic lavas from SE Lake Chad are consistent with the well-developed negative Ba, P, Sr, Ti and Eu anomalies; and the K anomalies which characterize the Hadjer Bigli rhyolites. The oxygen fugacity of melts ( The peralkaline and peraluminous rhyolitic magmas from SE Lake Chad derive likely from the same source, according to their coexistence in the same dome (Hadjer Bigli); their similar Zr/Nb, Zr/Hf ratios; their linear trends established in the following Zr Primary diversity in source rocks, varying amounts of extraction of an earlier melt phase, or tectonic juxtaposition suggested as causes of magma heterogeneity ( The rhyolitic magmas could be derived from various source materials, including enriched mantle, depleted mantle and felsic crust. The partial melting model of the underplated mantle, which would have induced the intrusion of crustal materials, triggering the hydrothermal reactions could be chosen to generate the magma of the SE Lake Chad rhyolites. This model could explain the cause of the lack of basaltic and intermediate volcanic rocks in the SE Lake Chad domain. The underplated basaltic magmas not only heat the overlying crust, but also interact with the silicic magmas and then alter their geochemical characters. The fluids transfer testified by the occurrence of F- and alkali-rich minerals, could come from a metasomatised mantle source ( In the Hadjer Bigli rhyolites Zr contents (1516–3623 ppm) are high. The others rhyolites from Hadjer al Hider and Hadjer el Hamis have low Zr contents (<587 ppm). This disparity of the Zr contents may show different contents in the source of the rocks, different mechanism of the melt production, or difference in magma evolution in time and space ( The high Zr concentrations (up to 3623 ppm) in the SE Lake Chad rhyolites are likely linked to the inhibition of the zircon phenocrysts crystallization ( The high Zr amounts Hadjer Bigli rhyolites are not related to bulk assimilation of partially melted crustal materials by the magmas from which these silicic rocks derived, as crustal materials are characterized by rather low Zr contents ( The peraluminous and peralkaline rhyolites from SE Lake Chad are characterized by the occurence of phases such as arfvedsonite (K, Ba, Ti), ilmenite (Ti), apatite (P) and alkali feldspar (K, Sr, Eu) consistent with the well-developed negative Ba, P, Sr, Ti and Eu anomalies. The occurence of nearly pure albite and sanidine are regarded as reflecting alkali exchange during sub-solidus hydrothermal reactions or as corresponding to late-stage recrystallization at hydrothermal conditions. Indeed, the silicic rocks of SE Lake Chad are from within plate domain and likely the product of the intraplate magmatism. According to their coexistence in the same dome (Hadjer Bigli), their similar Zr/Nb, Zr/Hf ratios and their linear trends established in Zr The TWAS (The Word Academy of Sciences) organization is acknowledged for providing a grant to G.I.B.M. for five months stay in Brazil in the Geosciences Institute, University of Brasilia (UnB). Anonymous reviewers and the editor Eriksson P. are thanked for their useful remarks.