Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) was introduced as a surfactant in the leaching of pure gold as well as a sulphide ore using ammoniacal thiosulphate medium. Competing with thiosulphate anions to complex with the cupric ion at the axial coordinate sites, CMC in small quantities reduced the consumption of thiosulphate in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching system. The dissolution of pure gold in thiosulphate solution was enhanced in the presence of CMC, and this beneficial effect became more pronounced with an increase in the CMC concentration up to a certain level. Extraction rates of gold and silver from the sulphide ore were improved greatly, while the consumption of thiosulphate was reduced in the presence of CMC especially at a higher CMC concentration. The enhanced leaching performance was attributed to the stabilisation of thiosulphate, likely reduced leaching passivation and the dispersion of mineral particles in the slurry system. Addition of CMC facilitates satisfactory gold extraction at low reagent consumption in thiosulphate leaching.Leaching of gold with ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions has been studied extensively as an alternative technology to the traditional cyanidation process ( One of the major problems in thiosulphate leaching is the high consumption of thiosulphate. This is mainly caused by thiosulphate decomposition in solutions containing copper, as shown in the following equation: In general, the thiosulphate leaching conditions reported in the literature are severe with high reagent consumption. From an economic point of view, it is required that the leaching should be carried out under low reagent concentrations over extended periods where reagent consumption is low. In order to achieve this, three key problems need to be solved, i.e. stabilising thiosulphate, maintaining copper ions at low concentrations in solutions to catalyse gold oxidation with low ammonia concentrations, and reducing passivation to allow gold leaching over extended periods. The ore mineralogy affected thiosulphate leaching of gold and thiosulphate consumption, and sulphide minerals were observed to retard the gold leaching and to catalyse the degradation of thiosulphate ( Carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), as a natural polymer, has been used extensively in the minerals industry to depress hydrophobic gangue minerals by rendering their surfaces hydrophilic in flotation ( Gold foils (99.99% Au, thickness 0.2 Pure pyrite, quartz and haematite samples were obtained from Geological Specimen Supplies, Australia. A sulphide gold ore was obtained from a Newcrest gold mine with a particle size of 80% passing 75 A diagnostic leaching test using thiosulphate was conducted previously on a similar sulphide ore ( Elemental concentrations in solutions were determined by ICP-OES, involving the oxidation of sulphur species to stable sulphates prior to the analysis. After oxidation by hydrogen peroxide, solutions were acidified by aqua regia and boiled to ensure complete conversion of the metal species to the chloride form. For silver analysis, the oxidised solutions were only acidified by HNO Experiments for pure gold leaching were performed in a 250 The leaching of the sulphide ore was performed in a 1.5  The presence of CMC slightly decreased the degradation of thiosulphate, and this effect became more pronounced at a higher CMC concentration ( The enhanced dissolution of gold with the addition of CMC was likely attributed to the reduction of leaching passivation, besides the stabilisation of thiosulphate by CMC. The gold dissolution rate remained high over an extended period in the presence of CMC, but decreased after 7  Clearly, the leaching of sulphur species from the sulphide ore increased significantly in the presence of CMC, as reflected by a sharp increase in the sulphur concentration in   Lower mixed potentials were beneficial for the stability of thiosulphate in the presence of CMC. The carboxymethyl and hydroxyl groups of CMC likely competed with the thiosulphate ions to complex with the cupric ion at the axial coordinate sites, and hence reduced the consumption of thiosulphate in the leaching of the sulphide ore ( The dominant mineral in the sulphide ore was quartz. The CMC modified quartz surface was highly negatively charged via the adsorption of CMC ( Iron oxides and hydroxides are ubiquitous in mixed sulphide ore pulps, originating from the mild steel grinding media, iron sulphide minerals and non-sulphide gangue. Previous investigations ( In thiosulphate leaching systems, it is expected that colloidal iron oxide slime coatings would also be unavoidable, originating from mild steel grinding media, dissolution of iron minerals as well as soluble iron species in ores. The presence of colloidal iron oxide coatings at mineral surfaces was observed to significantly retard thiosulphate leaching of gold ores ( The highly charged reagent CMC adsorbed at the surfaces of the iron oxide/hydroxide slimes and minerals and rendered their surfaces all highly negatively charged across the full pH range (  The effect of CMC on ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of gold was investigated in both pure gold and sulphide ore leaching systems. A higher CMC concentration favoured gold dissolution, while excessive CMC dosage reduced this beneficial effect. The carboxymethyl and hydroxyl groups of CMC competed with the thiosulphate anions to complex with the cupric ion at the axial coordinate sites, reducing the reactions between cupric ions and thiosulphate. Thiosulphate became more stable at raised CMC concentrations. The extraction rates of gold and silver increased substantially in the thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide ore and the thiosulphate consumption was reduced in the presence of CMC. These beneficial effects became more pronounced at a higher CMC concentration. CMC has highly negatively charged functional groups of carboxymethyl and hydroxyl and its adsorption is non-selective. CMC rendered all mineral particles negatively charged in suspensions, reducing the precipitation of secondary products on the particle surfaces and enhancing the dispersion of the leach slurry. At the low reagent concentrations, nearly 100% of gold extraction was achieved over extended periods of leaching in the presence of CMC. The financial support from Newcrest Mining Limited, Placer Dome Technical Services Limited, and the Australian Research Council is gratefully acknowledged.