Removal of carbonate gangue is desirable prior to acid pressure leaching when a refractory gold-bearing sulfide ore contains a significant amount of carbonate minerals. This is usually achieved by direct flotation of the gold and sulfide minerals into a bulk flotation concentrate. However, if the flotation recoveries of gold and sulfide are unsatisfactory, reverse flotation of the carbonate minerals is a possible alternative. In this study, calcite and dolomite were used as representative carbonate minerals, and pyrite and chalcopyrite as representative sulfide minerals to study the feasibility of the reverse flotation. It was found that by using sodium oleate as a collector, and a mixture of thioglycollic acid and citric acid as a selective depressant, calcite could be selectively floated away from the sulfide minerals between pH 9 and 11. Dolomite could be separated from pyrite but could not be separated from chalcopyrite under the reported test conditions.Most of the gold ore deposits being explored or developed now are fully or partially refractory ( One of the common reasons for the refractoriness of a gold ore is that the gold is locked in a sulfide mineral matrix blocking the access by cyanide solutions. The gold can be encapsulated in the sulfide matrix in microscopic or solid-solution forms so that even fine grinding cannot open sufficient channels for cyanide solutions ( In order to recover gold from these refractory gold ores, an oxidative pretreatment is required to destroy the host sulfide minerals so that the encapsulated gold is released and becomes amenable to cyanide leaching. To date only two methods, roasting and pressure oxidation, have been successfully used on a commercial scale. Several other techniques, such as biological oxidation and chemical oxidation, are mostly being tested at the pilot plant scale ( Roasting has been used for more than a century and has been applied successfully to a wide range of materials ( Alkaline pressure oxidation can be used to process refractory gold ores with high carbonate contents. However, the process has several drawbacks which have prevented it from being used extensively: (1) under the alkaline conditions sulfur and arsenic in the refractory ores are completely dissolved as sulfates and arsenates, making the isolation of arsenic difficult ( When a refractory gold ore has a high carbonate content, direct acid pressure oxidation is not suitable because the carbonate minerals would consume large amount of acid. This not only adversely affects the economics of the process, but also lowers the pressure oxidation efficiency due to the release of CO Even if the refractory gold-bearing sulfide ores generate sufficient acid during the pressure oxidation process that can be recycled to neutralize the carbonate in the feed before it enters the autoclave, the slimy precipitates formed from the neutralization reactions can foul the activated carbon in the follow-up gold recovery processes. The mass of hydroxides, hydrated oxides and gypsum precipitated from the slurry would change the slurry viscosity which can also have a substantial impact on downstream processing ( In order to maintain autogenous reactions inside the pressure oxidation autoclave, the refractory gold-bearing sulfide ores are usually pre-concentrated by floating the gold and sulfide minerals into a bulk concentrate that is then pressure oxidized ( Reverse flotation of carbonate minerals from refractory gold-bearing sulfide ores requires the flotation of the carbonate minerals (calcite, dolomite, siderite, etc.) while depressing sulfide minerals and native gold. The flotation of carbonates can be achieved by anionic oxyhydryl collectors and this has been well established. However, depression of sulfide minerals when non-sulfhydryl collectors are used as collectors has not been extensively studied, although much information on the depression is available when sulfhydryl collectors are used (e.g., In this paper, we report flotation results obtained on several representative single minerals, calcite, dolomite, pyrite, chalcopyrite, and their mixtures, using sodium oleate as a collector and several organic chemicals as selective depressants. Calcite, dolomite, pyrite and chalcopyrite were all purchased from Ward's Scientific Establishment, Inc. The first three minerals were used without upgrading except that during crushing some of the obvious impure particles were picked out. The chalcopyrite was purified on a Frantz Isodynamic Separator after pulverization. Lumps of the mineral samples were crushed in a laboratory jaw crusher to −20 mm and in a cone crusher to −2 mm. Impurity particles were picked out after crushing. The crushed sample was then ground in a stainless steel Brinkmann pulverizer, and dry screened into −0.106 Sodium oleate, purchased from Riedel-deHaen and assaying more than 82% oleate, was used without purification. Thioglycollic acid was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and had a purity of more than 98%. Citric acid, hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were all of analytical grades and were purchased from Fisher Scientific. They were used directly without further purification. Distilled water was used in all experimental work. Stock solutions of sodium oleate, citric acid and thioglycollic acid were prepared everyday. Flotation tests were conducted in a flotation tube that was described in a previous work ( Sodium oleate is commonly used as a collector for the carbonate minerals calcite and dolomite. Considerable amount of information is available, as summarized by    On the other hand, since The conventional depressants for the sulfhydryl collector flotation of sulfide minerals, such as sodium sulfide, sodium cyanide, and sulfur dioxide, etc., were usually reducing agents and environmentally unfriendly, and were considered inappropriate ( Based on cost considerations, we did not pursue the use of starch xanthate as a depressant for the sulfide minerals although a starch xanthate was synthesized and tested in the sodium oleate flotation of pyrite and showed promise. As can be seen from Thioglycollic acid showed some depressive effect on chalcopyrite and caused about 20% drop in its recovery at 1 The depressive effect of thioglycollic acid on pyrite was interesting in that strong depression was observed only at concentrations lower than 1   The acidity of citric acid was lower than that of thioglycollic acid, which may explain why increasing the concentration of the citric acid did not restore the flotation of pyrite as much as thioglycollic acid did. Citric acid has been reported as an antioxidant synergist due to its ability to chelate metal ions that act as pro-oxidants ( These two figures clearly show that the mixed depressant was better than either one used alone. The depressive effect on pyrite was stronger and the lowest recovery was obtained at much lower reagent dosages, although the restoration of pyrite recovery at higher dosages of the mixed depressant was still observed ( More significantly, chalcopyrite, which was not depressed by either thioglycollic acid or citric acid alone, was depressed by the mixed depressant in the concentration range of 2  A window of separation between the carbonate minerals and sulfide minerals can be seen from In these tests, a carbonate mineral was blended with a sulfide mineral at 1:1 weight ratio and floated using similar procedures as in single mineral flotation tests. At the end of the flotation, the grades of the concentrates and tails were determined by measuring the Ca, Mg, Fe or Cu contents using atomic absorption spectroscopy. Separation efficiency       The separation of dolomite from chalcopyrite was unsuccessful. As Flotation tests were conducted on high purity single minerals of carbonate (calcite and dolomite) and sulfide (pyrite and chalcopyrite), and their mixtures, using sodium oleate as a collector and thioglycollic acid and citric acid as sulfide mineral depressants. The results showed that: The tested carbonate and sulfide minerals had similar floatability using sodium oleate as a collector. Selective depression of the sulfide minerals could not be achieved by raising pulp pH. Both thioglycollic acid and citric acid selectively depressed the sodium oleate flotation of pyrite between pH 9.0 and 10.5 without affecting the flotation of calcite and dolomite. However, neither acid could depress chalcopyrite. When the thioglycollic acid and citric acid were mixed at 1:1 molar ratio, the mixture became a much stronger selective depressant. Not only the dosages required for pyrite depression were significantly reduced, but the mixed depressant also depressed chalcopyrite, without affecting the flotation of the carbonate minerals. Using the mixed depressant, the carbonate minerals could be selectively floated from carbonate–sulfide mineral mixtures. Generally, calcite could be readily floated away from pyrite and chalcopyrite. While dolomite could be separated from pyrite, it was not separated from chalcopyrite under the test conditions. These observations may provide a means to treat some high-carbonate refractory gold-sulfide ores through a reverse carbonate flotation process. The flotation behavior of native gold in the sodium oleate and thioglycollic acid/citric acid system was not studied. However, it is expected that native gold does not present a problem because if it is floated into the carbonate concentrate, it can always be recovered by a subsequent cyanidation of the carbonate concentrate. The project was supported by a research grant from the National Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada.