Various sintering theories based on two-particle model are no longer valid. Apart from this the basic properties and data of materials are also much more accurate in the present date, thus casting doubt in the previous theories. The role of electronic structure of additives in activating sintering processes has been convincingly put forth. In the field of sintering practice still a gap is apparent with the theory. Various techno-economic factors including the nature of starting powders have, of late, given good impetus in tackling this challenge.Hausner Sintering mechanisms have been discussed by various workers mainly under two categories: plastic deformation mechanism; diffusion mechanism. The first one was postulated by Lenel The quantitative formulation of sintering theory presents the equations linking some dimensional variables such as neck or pore radius or volume of a compact, with time and temperature prevailing during the process. All sintering equations contain a number of parameters such as diffusion coefficient, surface tension, particle size, initial pore volume, etc. One can divide these parameters into two classes: Intrinsic — these specify the intrinsic properties of the materials being sintered, such as surface tension, diffusion coefficient, vapour pressure, viscosity, etc. These properties change when the chemical composition, ambient atmosphere or temperature changes. Extrinsic — these depend on the geometrical or topological details of a system. These include parameters, as average particle size, particle or pore or grain shape and size distribution, etc. These two classes of parameters are in some way or the other interdependent also. For example in the fabrication of fully dense Al In real systems the geometric assumptions described earlier do not exactly apply. According to Kuczynski    Particle rearrangement also occurs in pressed or loose powders and leads to the formation of large pores between dense regions. The irregular particle geometry has similar effect of asymmetrical packing. Anisotropic pore elongation may occur when powder is filled into die or during pressing. Such an effect in compacts leads to poor dimensional control and distortion. Exner It is essential that the green structural condition be characterised and quantified to understand the pore elimination events during sintering. The homogeneity of the green structure provides a basis for prediction of the sintering response and sintering defects. Defect control in the green structure requires measurement of the stress state in forming. In turn, the green microstructure factors need to be clearly linked to the sintering response, since the utility of sintering models will be limited by our ability to quantify the starting microstructure. In search of a generalised theory of sintering Kuczynski The basic assumption of Kuczynski’s statistical approach are qualitatively reasonable, although the conclusive confirmation for the validity of Zener’s equation for porous materials and the proof of the quasi-stationary pore size distribution, on first principles are not yet available. Another attempt to derive generalised shrinkage equation was made by Johnson Samsonov The correlation of self-diffusivity data with electronic configuration has been done by Upadhyaya Upadhyaya and his co-workers successfully interpreted the sintering behaviour of copper alloys Schatt and Freidrich At present no quantitative predictions can be made about the densification rates on multicomponent systems. The reactions of the systems to sintering depend on the relative solubilities of the species in one another, the relative surface energies and relative diffusion rates. Material transport occurs as a result of surface curvature and gradients in the concentrations of the atomic species. One major difficulty in understanding the exact means of operation of an additive is that so many alternative mechanisms for these processes exist. Thus, e.g. the additive can work as a second phase or as a solid solution. As a second phase providing a high diffusivity path way, e.g. liquid phase at the boundaries; providing a continuous low diffusivity pathway at the boundaries for diffusion across the boundary, which then acts to restrain grain boundary movement. As solid solution enhancing diffusion coefficients for the controlling species in the lattice or parallel to the grain boundary by effecting the point defect concentrations in the boundary or lattice; slowing grain boundary movement by forming a segregated layer at the boundary which must then be pulled along by the boundary; altering the overall driving force for sintering by altering the ratio of grain boundary energy to free surface energy; slowing intrinsic grain boundary movement by reducing the diffusion coefficient for atom movement across the grain boundary, again by affecting the defect chemistry. Activated sintering allows for either a lower sintering temperature, a shorter sintering time, or improvement in properties from a chemical addition to the powder. One of the most dramatic examples of activated sintering occurs when tungsten or molybdenum is treated with certain transition metals    In two-phase systems involving mixed powders, liquid formation is possible because of different melting ranges for the components. In such a system, the liquid may provide for rapid transport and therefore sintering if certain criteria are met. These criteria are similar to those for activated sintering. A number of workers Apart from adjusting the composition and impurity contents, sintering atmosphere also affects the sintering mechanisms. Gas transport rates are high and major changes are possible in pore structure, grain shape, impurity content, and sintering kinetics through sintering atmosphere. For example, several materials processed in a halide atmosphere show minimal shrinkage but accelerated coarsening due to enhanced vapour transport. Other microstructural changes are apparent in grain faceting, grain growth, surface area and pore size. A rationale is necessary to determine which atmospheres are most effective for impurity control, leading to the possible use of highly active atmospheres. Pore mobility and pore size are affected by vapour transport, so there is an opportunity to independently influence the grain growth and pore mobility rates via temperature and atmosphere control. Besides allowing composition adjustments, the sintering atmosphere affects the surface structure and in some instances gives a change in the vacancy population. This can be effective in metallic systems where oxidation and reduction cycles influence diffusion rates. Alternatively, vacuum sintering leads to preferential evaporation and loss of stoichiometry in surface regions. Novel heating mechanisms are needed to be developed for sintering powders, particularly of small sizes, to assure densification without microstructure coarsening and impurity accumulation at grain boundaries during grain growth. Conventional sintering relies on external heating and thermal diffusion to induce bonding between particles. Heat is conducted from the external surface and heating rates are limited by thermal shock and heat transfer. Plasma heating, plasma activated sintering, laser pulsing, induction heating, spark sintering and microwave sintering are some of the novel options. Benefits from the new processing routes vary from faster and more uniform heating rates to the promotion of activated surfaces. Microwave energy has been shown to be applicable to drying, calcining, sintering, binder burnout, joining, plasma assisted sintering, and chemical vapour deposition. Because of the volumetric nature of microwave heating, it offers many advantages over conventional processing, among them rapid and internal heating, precise and controlled heating, potential cost savings in time and energy, improved properties and in some cases, new microstructures, finer grain sizes, enhanced mechanical properties and in general, processing capabilities not possible by conventional methods. Plasma activated sintering (PAS) is a rather new consolidation technique where three effects contribute to an accelerated powder densification: pulsed electric discharge, resistance heating and mechanical pressure. Preliminary studies on pulsed electrical discharge effects in PAS indicate that a low temperature gas plasma state (plasma density of about 10 From technological viewpoint, shape retention of sintered parts is very essential. The problem is more severe in liquid phase sintered parts. German Novel sintered materials have been synthesised with mechanically alloyed powders. Metastable powders can be generated by intense attrition milling and these metastable structures can be preserved during sintering. It is desirable to have powders with reversible agglomeration and deagglomeration characteristics to adjust packing, handling and sintering behaviour. Superplastic forming is feasible with nanocrystalline materials and is preferable in some cases to pressureless sintering because of microstructure control. Research on grain growth during sintering for submicron size powders is still lacking. In the presence of liquid phase a still little information is available. The challenge here is to extend the knowledge available for large particles sintering to the small sized one. The theories and models for sintering now available give reasonably good guidance for many of the operations and control variables such as size, temperature and rate effects. The complexity starts when one deals with multicomponent real systems. It is essential to interrelate intrinsic parameters with the extrinsic one, and here the interface control may be more important that has been realised under special conditions in some materials. The nature of chemical bond as the fundamental intrinsic parameter and its manipulation for successful sintering by alloying has to be followed more closely. The rationale is needed for composition effects on a range of properties that is much more precise than our current data base provides.