The transformation behavior, mechanical properties and stretch-flangeability of an ultra-high-strength TRIP-assisted bainitic–ferritic sheet steel 0.2C–2Si–1.8Mn were investigated at different austempering temperatures for automotive applications. Increasing the austempering temperature was found to partially transform the uniform fine lath structure matrix and film-type metastable retained austenite into blocky martensite or austenite. The investigated steel exhibits good stretch-formability, particularly when austempered at temperatures lower than or slightly higher than the M
                     s point, accompanied by an excellent combination of strength and ductility. The good stretch-flangeability is related to a certain number of film-type metastable retained austenite structures. Blocky martensites, which blocky austenite transforms into during the cooling process or subsequent tensile test, deteriorate the stretch-flangeability.The automobile industry has been devoted to improving fuel efficiency by using lightweight structural materials in car bodies. The incorporation of advanced high-strength steel (AHSS) in automotive parts improves fuel efficiency. Transformation-induced plasticity (TRIP) steel, which is an advanced high-strength steel, contains a metastable retained austenite phase, which is its most prominent characteristic. Recently, silicon-containing TRIP steels have garnered considerable interest due to their excellent properties and potential for use in automotive structural components. TRIP steels exhibit an excellent combination of high strength, superior formability, and good crashworthiness. Essentially, the enhanced formability and energy absorption behavior can be attributed to the TRIP effect, which is metastable retained austenite that transforms into martensite under local stress and strain However, traditional TRIP steel applications to suspension parts, such as the suspension arms, that can significantly reduce the weight, are lacking, due to the poor stretch-flangeability. The poor stretch-flangeability of traditional TRIP steel may be overcome by replacing the ferrite matrix with a bainitic ferrite matrix because bainitic steel generally possesses excellent stretch-flangeability due to the uniform fine lath structure. The replacement of the polygonal ferritic matrix present in conventional TRIP steel by bainite and/or tempered martensite diminishes the hardness differences between the phases The chemical composition of the investigated steel is listed in The microstructures were examined using a light optical microscope (ZEISS,Imager.A1m), scanning electron microscopy (SEM, ZEISS ULTRA 55), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM2010). The volume fraction of the retained austenite was estimated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku, DMAX-RB). The samples for OM were prepared using a LePera color etchant. Bainite and ferrite appear blue and brown, whereas austenite and carbon-rich martensite appear white. Thus, the latter two materials are sometimes difficult to distinguish. The samples for the EBSD and XRD measurements were first mechanically ground and polished and then electrolytically etched in a solution of 10% perchloric acid. The samples for TEM were mechanically ground to a thickness of approximately 0.04 The volume fraction of the retained austenite was estimated by X-ray diffraction using a Cu target. The calculations were based on the integrated intensities of (200) The retained austenite lattice constant ( The tensile tests were carried out on a CMT testing machine at 20 Austempering temperatures play a crucial role in the transformation characteristics of the investigated steel, especially in the morphology of the retained austenite or martensite.  A military phase transformation occurred at temperatures lower than or near   When the investigated steel is austempered at 370 A certain amount of retained austenite is required for the investigated steel to have a TRIP effect. Producing an RA with proper stability was desired in order for the strain-induced martensitic transformation to occur gradually as the plastic strain increased. Of the chemical components in the investigated steel, carbon is the most potent stabilizer of RA. Carbon concentrations that are too high or too low carbon concentrations result in austenite that is too stable or unstable. A carbon concentration of approximately1.20% is most suitable for a strength–ductility balance, which will be examined in the following text. The stability of the retained austenite is also related to its morphology. Moreover, the size and morphology of the RA inside the bainite are significantly different from those of the RA inside polygonal ferrite, which may also affect how the stress is partitioned between the micro-constituents. The austenite grain size also plays an important role in the stability of RA. Finer RA grain sizes are considered to increase its stability. The width of interlath-retained austenite films was less than 200     Studying the relationship between the yield ratio and hole-expanding ratio multiplied by tensile strength for different austempering temperatures is reasonable, as given in  As the austempering temperature increases, the uniform fine lath structure matrix and film-type metastable retained austenite partially transform into blocky martensites or austenite. The investigated steel exhibits an excellent combination of strength and ductility when austempered at 410 A good stretch-flangeability requires a certain number of film-type metastable retained austenite structures. The local film-type retained austenite transforms into martensite and hardens the bainite ferrite matrix. The compressive stress on the bainite ferrite matrix prevents crack propagation and improves the stretch-flangeability. Blocky martensites, which blocky austenite transforms into during the cooling process or subsequent tensile test, act as the hard phase and behave like the source of the crack to lower the stretch-flangeability. This study is based on the work supported by the