Background
                  In the treatment of distal-third tibia/fibula fractures treated by interlocking nailing, the role of fibular fixation is not clearly defined. This study aimed to assess the benefits of fibular fixation in such fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Sixty patients with fractures of the lower third of the leg were enrolled into the study and divided into two groups based on whether the fibula was fixed (group A) or not (group B). Fracture tibia was treated with interlocked intramedullary nailing and fibular fixation was done using a 3.5-mm Limited Contact Dynamic Compression Plate (LC-DCP). The two groups were compared for differences in rotation at ankle, angulation at the fracture site, time of union and complications. Clinical and functional outcomes were assessed regularly. Merchant–Dietz criteria were used to assess ankle function.
               
                  Results
                  The demographics of the two groups were similar. Average valgus angulation was significantly less in group A (average 5°) versus group B (average 9°). The degree of rotational malalignment at the ankle in group A was average 7° versus average 15° in group B. The outcome of two groups for clinical ankle score, time of union and complications showed no significant differences.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fixation of the fibula along with interlocking nailing of the tibia decreases the malalignment of the tibia and malrotation of the ankle in distal-third fractures of the tibia and fibula as compared with only interlocking nailing.This study aimed to assess the role of fibular fixation in distal-third tibia and fibula fractures and its significance with respect to the functional outcomes in decreasing malrotation and malalignment of the limb. With high-speed transport, extensive mechanisation and increased violence, we are not only encountering a greater number of fractures but a large number of them are caused by severe trauma resulting in a higher number of open, segmental and comminuted fractures of any part of the skeleton. Fractures of shafts of the tibia and fibula are the most common diaphyseal fractures among all long bones Several cadaveric studies have suggested that the fibula contributes significantly to lower-leg weight-bearing and could act as a strut, relieving stress from the tibia and allowing earlier healing. Others have reported that the intact fibula contributes little to the support of the lower leg, provides no additional stability to fixation of a fractured tibia and even creates abnormal strain and complicates compression and fixation of tibial fractures. One study concluded that fibular plate fixation increased the initial rotational stability with distal-third of the shaft tibia–fibula fractures compared with intramedullary nailing of tibia alone Clinical reports of significance of an intact fibula are also conflicting. While some studies have found that an intact fibula is a source of distraction and partial fibulectomy facilitates compression of tibial fractures, others have promoted primary fixation of the fibula to prevent fibular nonunion, which can interfere with tibial healing. Reported effects of fibula integrity on tibial nonunion are mixed Considerable concern exists that malalignment of a healed distal-third tibial-shaft fracture may result in posttraumatic arthritis of the ankle. As the location of the deformity approaches the ankle, malalignment results in maldistribution of articular surface pressures that may predispose a patient to premature osteoarthritis This study was undertaken to examine the effects of fibular fixation on healing of the ipsilateral tibia in combined fractures of distal-third shafts of the tibia and fibula and to outline the advantages and benefits of fixation of the fibula in such fractures, if any. A total of 60 patients who had fractures of the lower-third shafts of the tibia and fibula were included in the present study from July 2009 to December 2011. The purpose of the study was to compare the effects of fixation of the fibula in fractures of the lower third of the leg (group A) with those in which fixation of the fibula was not done (group B), the fractured tibia being treated with an interlocking intramedullary tibial nail (EXPERT nail, AO Synthes, Paoli, IN, USA) in all the cases and fixation of fibular fracture done using a 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate (DCP).  Patients with fracture of both bones of the leg distal to the isthmus and 4–5 fresh cases of lower one-third leg fractures, patients who attained skeletal maturity and were active (20–45 years) and closed as well as Gustilo–Anderson type I and type II open lower one-third diaphyseal fractures of the leg.  Patients with intra-articular fractures of the distal third of the tibia and fibula, paediatric and elderly patients with a non-active lifestyle and minimum functional requirement, segmental fractures of the tibia and Gustilo–Anderson type III fractures. In all the cases included in the study, the tibial fracture was fixed with interlocking intramedullary nails. Two well-trained senior surgeons with vast experience in trauma management were involved and at least one of them was part of the surgical team in each case in the study. The decision to fix the fibular fracture was by randomisation of cases as described in Statistical Methods. All patients underwent a primary survey and haemodynamic stabilisation in the Emergency Department. Evaluation of the presence of other fractures and systemic evaluation was done subsequently on secondary survey. Appropriate antero-posterior and lateral radiographs were taken and the limb was immobilised and elevated on a Bohler–Braun splint. The fracture patterns were classified according to the Orthopaedic Trauma Association classification. Open fractures were classified according to the criteria of Gustilo and Anderson. The fibula was addressed first in all cases as it was presumed to help in achieving the length and rotation and aiding the tibial reduction. All cases were managed under regional anaesthesia. Spinal/epidural anaesthesia provided sufficient muscle relaxation for lower-limb surgeries Longitudinal traction was applied along the calcaneal skeletal pin. Rotational alignment was achieved by aligning the anterior superior iliac spine, patella and second ray of the foot. The affected leg was cleaned and draped from mid-thigh to the foot. The image intensifier was draped with sterile isolation drapes. After painting and draping the leg, a straight incision that parallels the shaft of the lower third of the fibula was made. The subcutaneous tissue was not undermined. The fracture site was opened and reduction held with bone-holding clamps. The fracture was fixed with a 3.5-mm DCP and cortical screws. A 5-cm incision was made medial to the patellar ligament. Using a curved awl, the medullary canal was opened proximal to the tibial tuberosity at the level corresponding to the proximal tip of the fibular head. The bone awl was centred in the medullary canal in orthogonal views. A curved 3.2-mm ball-tipped guide wire was inserted up to the level of the fracture. The proximal fragment was reduced with the distal fragment. Under C-arm guidance, the guide wire was advanced in the distal fragment, centring in both antero-posterior (AP) and lateral views. The guide wire was introduced 0.5–1 The tibia was reamed using cannulated reamers over the guide wire in 0.5-mm increments until the desired diameter was achieved. A nail 1–1.5 The selected nail was attached to the proximal drill guide with the hexagonal bolt. The nail was driven over the guide rod until it entered the metaphysis of the distal fragment. The guide wire was then withdrawn. The nail was driven further until its proximal tip was countersunk into the tibial entry portal and distally the nail reached the tip of the guide wire. Two distal locking screws were inserted using a freehand technique with the help of an image intensifier. Gentle back hammering was done to close any remaining fracture gap. Proximal locking was done with two locking bolts with the help of a proximal tibial locking jig. Postoperatively, all the patients were mobilised non-weight-bearing with crutches or walkers from the first postoperative day. Mobilisation of the knee and ankle was started in the immediate postoperative period. Sutures were removed on the 14th postoperative day. An X-ray of the involved leg was taken postoperatively, including both knee and ankle joints in the same film. Patients were followed up clinically and radiographically at 2, 4, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months. Data were collected by verbal communication, clinical examination and radiographs. In the postoperative radiographs, tibial malalignment was measured. The degree of the tibial angulation (varus or valgus) was measured on the AP radiographs by determining the angle formed by the intersection between the perpendicular lines drawn from the tibial plateau and the tibial plafond At the end of 6 months, evaluation of the range of movement (dorsiflexion and plantar flexion) at the ankle and clinical assessment of rotational malalignment was done. The functional assessment of the ankle was done at regular follow-up using the Ankle-Evaluation Rating System of Merchant and Dietz Randomisation: Cases were randomised by the block method of randomisation using sealed envelopes with a block size of four and six. Thirty envelopes of each group were prepared. Two envelopes from each group were taken for a block of four and three envelopes from each group for a block of six. In this manner, six blocks each of size four and six were produced. Envelopes were shuffled within a block but ‘not’ among the blocks. Then, these blocks of four and six were piled up by flipping a coin. For heads, a block of four was taken and for tails, a block of six was taken and piled up. This pile was ‘not’ mixed. The envelopes were then sequentially numbered from 1 to 60 and were ready to be used for the study  The statistical software, namely SPSS 11.0 and Systat 8.0, were used for the analysis of the data and Microsoft Word and Excel, 2007 edition, were used to generate graphs and tables. A prospective clinical study consisting of 60 patients, who presented to the Department of Orthopaedics of our hospital with fractures of the lower third of the tibia and fibula, was undertaken to assess the functional difference in patients in whom fibular fixation was done (group A) compared to those in whom fibular fixation was not done (group B). Sixty patients who had fractures of the lower third of the tibia and fibula and who were treated in the Department of Orthopaedics of our hospital were followed up for 18 months in this study.       Normally, the ankle is in 12–15° of external rotation. Any deviation from the same is taken as external/internal rotation deformity at the ankle. In our study, however, the normal limb of the subject was taken as control for comparison of rotational alignment. The subjects were made to lie down supine. By standing at the foot end of the patient, the rotation of the ankle was determined by measuring the angle subtended by a plumb line with a line passing through the mid-point of the knee, the line joining the mid-point of the ankle (intermalleolar distance) and the second toe. Malrotation was defined as an internal/external rotation deformity >10° as compared to the normal contralateral limb. All the cases were assessed for external rotation deformity whether the fibula was fixed or not. The average external rotation deformity of the ankle in patients of group A was 7.73° and that for patients of group B was 10.60°. To assess the effect of rotation, the patients were divided into four groups: excellent: 0–5° external rotation, good: 5–10° external rotation, fair: 10–15° external rotation and poor: >15° external rotation. All the patients in group A had good results. In group B, 66.66% of the patients had good results, 33.33% had fair results and no patient had poor results ( All the cases were assessed for valgus angulation, irrespective of whether the fibula was fixed or not. The average valgus deformity of the tibia in group A was 5.06° and in group B was 7.86°. To assess the effect of angulation, the patients were divided into four groups: excellent: 0–1° valgus/varus, good: 2–5° valgus/varus, fair: 6–10° valgus/varus and poor: >10° valgus/varus Eighty percent of patients of group A had fair results, 20% of the patients had fair results and none had poor results. Among patients of group B, all had fair results ( The mean range of movements in patients with fibula fixation was 78.33° and in those without fibula fixation, it was 74.66°. To assess the range of movements at the ankle, the patients were divided into four groups: excellent: 100% motion of ankle, good: >75% motion of ankle, fair: 50–75% motion of ankle and poor: <50% motion of ankle. In group A, 73.33% of the patients had good results and 26.66% had fair results. In group B, 66.67% of the patients had good results and 33.33% had fair results ( A clinical assessment of ankle function according to the criteria of Merchant and Dietz was determined for each ankle at the end of 2, 4, 6, 9, 12 and 18 months’ follow-up. The final results were considered for the follow-up scores at 18 months. The rating system is a 100-point scale allotting 40 points each for function and pain and 10 points each for gait and ankle range of motion. The mean clinical score in group A was 93.86 points and in group B, it was 90.53 points (   At the end of 18 months, patients were divided into four groups, those with excellent, good, fair and poor results. In group A, 24 patients (80%) had good results and six (20%) had fair results. Among the 30 patients in group B, 20 patients (66.66%) had good results and 10 (33.33%) had fair results ( The role of fibula fixation in distal-third fractures of the shaft of tibia and fibula has not been clearly defined The relatively wider diameter of the medullary canal of the distal fragment decreases the amount of fixation with less contact surface between the nail and the bone; this in turn can result in the distal fragment going for valgus/varus angulation. The short distal tibial segment could be a factor. The most important factor in avoiding malreduction of the distal fragment is ensuring that the guide wire is placed in the exact middle of the medullary canal and that it is perpendicular to the tibial plafond. Any variation from this can result in the distal segment being assessed for valgus/varus angulation Comminution at the fracture site could also be involved. The average valgus angulation was less, (i.e., 5.66°) when the fibula was fixed (group A) when compared to 8° in cases where the fibula was not fixed (group B). The fixation of the fibula establishes the length of the lateral column. When the fixation of the fibula is done prior to nailing of the tibia, it helps to restore the alignment of proximal and distal tibial fragments The average rotation at ankle was less (i.e., 7.67° of external rotation in group A) as compared to 10.6° of external rotation in group B ( Merchant and Dietz Patients treated with fixation of fibula had comparatively higher complications than those without. Three out of 30 patients treated with fixation of fibula developed superficial wound infections over the fibular wound site. All of them were controlled by appropriate dressing and antibiotics. Assessment of results according to Johner and Wruh's criteria showed that the distribution of results were statistically similar between patients with and without fibula fixation (  The two groups were small, which decreases the power to detect the possible real differences that might exist between the two groups. The follow-up period was short. The results may also be influenced by the experience and personal bias of senior surgeons and they may be less reflective of the procedure or sequence itself.  The number of cases in the two groups can be increased so as to detect the real differences that might exist between the two groups. The duration of the follow-up period has to be longer to assess the rates of complication such as osteoarthritis at the ankle and functional disability. Based on the results of the study, the following conclusions were drawn: Rotational malalignment was less in patients with lower-third tibia and fibula fractures in whom the fibula was fixed (group A) compared to those in whom the fibula was not fixed (group B). Tibial malalignment (valgus angulation) was less in patients in group A as compared to group B. The functional score after 12 months’ follow-up between the two groups was statistically similar. There was no significant difference in the time of union of the tibial fracture between the two groups. There was no significant difference in the rate of complications between the two groups.     We report no conflicts of interest whatsoever.