The dissolution kinetics of phosphate ore in HCl solutions is investigated in the absence and presence of ultrasound. The particle size, reaction temperature, acid concentration and amplitude of ultrasound power were chosen as parameters. The reaction is first order with respect to H+ and activation energy equal to 18 kJ/mol in both cases. The effect of ultrasound is on the pre-exponential factor A. An empirical relation is given which relates rate constant to ultrasound power.Ultrasound is known to have great effects on chemical reactions The phenomena, which accompany ultrasound such as cavitation pressure of irradiation and vigorous turbulent currents, change the character of the diffusion layer formed on the solid placed in the liquid. The appearance of micro-currents due to ultrasonic irradiation on the solid–liquid interfaces in the suspension causes a considerable decrease in the diffusion layer thickness, even compared with that which exists when the suspension is stirred vigorously. Cavitation effects lead to the appearance of many microcracks on the solid surface subjected to ultrasound. Because the diffusion speed increases, the solution reaches the bottom of capillaries and accelerates the leaching. In heterogeneous solid–liquid situations, the collapse of a cavitation bubble near a surface produces an unsymmetrical in-rush of fluid to fill the void with the result that a liquid jet is formed, targeted at the surface. This effect increases mass and heat transfer to the surface by disruption of the interfacial boundary layers. Interparticle collisions can lead to erosion, cleaning of the solid surfaces, degassing, wetting of the particles and particle size reduction. Power ultrasound enhances chemical and physical changes in a liquid medium through the generation and subsequent destruction of cavitation bubbles. Like any sound wave, ultrasound is propagated via a series of compression and rarefaction waves induced in the molecules of the medium through which it passes. At sufficiently high power, the rarefaction cycle may exceed the attractive forces of the molecules of the liquid and cavitation bubbles will form; the fate of these cavities, when they collapse in succeeding compression cycles, generates the energy for chemical and mechanical effects. The use of ultrasound in nickel extraction from lateritic nickel ore using a strain of The purpose of this work is to investigate the effect of ultrasonic energy on the kinetics of the dissolution of phosphate rock in HCl solution; Phosphate rock samples were obtained from Mazıdağı Phosphate rock concentration plant, Turkey. The chemical analysis of the phosphate rock is as follows: CaO 52.73%, P A schematic illustration of the experimental set-up is shown in Particle size, acid concentration, temperature and ultrasound power level were chosen as parameters to investigate their effects on the reaction kinetics. A 10% excess acid was used in all the experiments. Experiments were conducted in both the presence (ultrasound power: 10.96 W) and absence of ultrasound to ascertain the effect of ultrasound. In all the experiments, stirring rate of 800 min For a first order chemical reaction with respect to The activation energy of the reaction is estimated from the Arrhenius plot To investigate the effect of ultrasound power on the reaction kinetics, controlled setting of power input is required. The amplitude setting of the generator is used for this purpose. A linear dependence is obtained between amplitude setting and power input measured by the calorimetric method The dependence of reaction kinetics on ultrasound power is usually expressed by the following relation The data given Finally, the rate expression may be summarized as follows; The dissolution kinetics of phosphate rocks in acidic medium (HCl) have been investigated in both the presence and absence of ultrasound. The particle size, reaction temperature, acid concentration and amplitude of ultrasound power were chosen as parameters. According to the results of the study, it was observed that, increase of acid concentration, reaction temperature and amplitude of ultrasound power increased the conversion fraction. The reaction is chemically controlled and found to be first order with respect to H Molar concentration of acid (mol/dm Initial molar concentration of acid (mol/dm Activation energy (kJ/mol) First order reaction rate constant based on unit surface area (m/s) Initial number of moles of solid reactant Radius of unreacted core (m) Initial particle radius (m) Time (s) Temperature (K) Fractional conversion of solid reactant Reaction volume (dm Ultrasound power (W) Molar density of solid reactant (mol/dm Time for complete conversion of solid particle (s)