Comminution in stirred media mills enables the production of ultrafine particles down to the nanometer range. The grinding results are mainly determined by two contrary mechanisms: particle breakage and agglomeration of the so-created fragments. These competing phenomena often lead to a plateau in particle size above a certain energy input. The degree of agglomeration and therefore the final aggregate size can be controlled by the addition of stabilizers and by the applied shear forces. In this paper the agglomeration behavior of silica particles under different milling and stability conditions is presented. Furthermore the particle breakage behavior in the nanometer range as the other size-determining mechanism will be discussed. In long term grinding experiments with different materials the kinetics of particle breakage as well as the grinding limit as the minimal achievable particle size could be obtained.Nanoparticles are increasingly used in many areas of chemical and pharmaceutical as well as in ceramic and microelectronic industry. Besides the direct synthesis of these materials by chemical methods, wet grinding in stirred media mills is a suitable technique for the production of nanoparticles in the liquid phase with high solid concentrations Investigations in microstructural changes during comminution processes are already established in the field of mechanical alloying, where extremely fine microstructures of elementary metals or alloys can be produced by mechanical stressing in high-energy ball mills Further studies into the grinding limit in comminution processes were described by Koch In this paper we present results of long term grinding experiments of different materials in a stirred media mill and discuss the influencing parameters on breakage kinetics and the grinding limit. With the knowledge about the breakage behavior in the nanometer range comminution processes in the field of wet ultrafine grinding can be controlled and optimized in order to avoid excessive energy input which in turn increases the efficiency of milling. Colloidal silica (Ludox TM-50, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as model system for agglomeration experiments. Ludox TM-50 is an aqueous dispersion of silica particles with a primary particle size of around 30 nm diameter. The original suspension has a pH value of 8.84 and a solid concentration of 50 wt.%. The experiments have been carried out with a 5 wt.% Ludox suspension. Therefore, the Ludox was diluted in aqueous KOH solution with the same pH value as the original suspension. The materials used in the milling experiments along with their initial particle sizes are summarized in Ethanol (96% denatured with 1% MEK, VWR, Germany) and distilled water were used as dispersants. Wear resistant, commercially available yttrium-stabilized zirconia (ZrO All milling experiments in aqueous suspensions were carried out in a six disc stirred media mill with a content of 0.95 l. The suspension flows axially through the mill and a sieving cartridge with gaps of 100 µm prevents milling beads from leaving the grinding chamber. The grinding chamber is lined for wear protection reasons with ceramic walls (SiSiC) and the stirrer is equipped with discs of polyurethane (PU). The experimental set-up provides a circuit mode comminution of the product. The suspension is pumped with a hose pump from the grinding chamber into a stirred vessel, where samples can be taken and stabilizers added. From the vessel the suspension flows back into the mill. The commercial laboratory mill LabStar LS 1 (Netzsch, Germany) was used for the milling experiments in ethanol. A schematic diagram of the milling chamber is shown in The particle size distributions of the milled samples were obtained by measuring the intensity fluctuations of the scattered light of a 3 mW semiconductor laser with a wavelength of 780 nm using the Honeywell Microtrac Ultrafine Particle Analyzer (UPA). BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) measurements to determine the specific surface area of the particles were carried out on a Quantachrome NOVA 2000 gas sorption analyzer. The samples were degassed for 12 h at 150 °C under vacuum to remove adsorbed solvent molecules. The specific surface area was determined using a 7-point method with nitrogen as adsorption gas. The XRD data was collected using a Siemens D 5000 powder diffractometer with graphite secondary monochromator using Cu K SEM images were obtained using a Carl Zeiss SMT Gemini Ultra 55 with EDX-detector from Thermo Electron. The concentrated suspension was diluted and dispersed by sonification before spreading it on a cleaned Si-Wafer via spin-coating. The prepared wafer was dried under dust free conditions. The particle size distribution of a milled suspension is often measured by laser diffraction and in the case of smaller particles (<  The observed plateau in particle size is defined as the apparent grinding limit which is mainly influenced by the stability of the suspension. As can be seen in The separation of the competing mechanisms which determine the apparent grinding limit by the following experiments enables a closer examination of the single process of agglomeration. Besides different stability conditions the influence of the stirrer tip speed on the agglomeration behavior under real milling conditions is presented in the following.  In To investigate the influence of agglomeration and deagglomeration on the final particle size in a real comminution process, grinding experiments with the SiO Through improving the suspension stability the agglomeration of particles can be reduced or in some cases completely avoided. The particle size in the milled suspension is then only determined by real particle breakage. This can be described by the evolution of the primary particle size with milling time. Under the assumption that particle breakage occurs at the grain boundaries, i.e. the weakest points in a polycrystalline material, the development of the crystallite size can be used to explain the breakage process. The crystallite sizes and the microstrains of the milled powders were determined from the X-ray patterns with a Rietveld refinement In The kinetics of particle breakage as well as the grinding limit depends on a multitude of influencing variables. These influencing variables can be separated into three groups: Material parameters (material properties of the milling powder, properties of the solvent, stability conditions) Process parameters (rotational speed of the stirrer, milling bead size and material, etc.) Machine parameters (design of the mill, kind of stressing, etc.). We have investigated the influence of different materials on the breakage behavior of particles in the nanometer range and their grinding limit. For this study five different materials (ZrO After stressing the particles for about 50 h, most of the materials have reached their grinding limit. The continually decreasing final mean crystallite sizes of some materials may be caused by a crystallite size distribution which gets narrower as large crystallites are still breaking while the smaller ones have already reached their grinding limit. Additionally an amorphization of the particle surface due to intensive mechanical stressing can also lead to slightly smaller crystallite sizes without implying a breakage of the crystallites.  For ductile materials like calcium carbonate the smallest crystallite size reached in the milling experiment under the chosen conditions was about 55 nm whereas for very brittle materials like zirconia a grinding limit of less than 5 nm was observed. Ductile materials respond to mechanical stressing with distinct plastic deformation whereas in brittle materials the applied energy is mainly used for particle fracture. We have to point out that the reached grinding limits are not fixed values. It should become clear that under different milling conditions, for example by changing the rotational speed of the stirrer other stress intensities and therefore different values of the true grinding limit might be achieved. A direct correlation of the minimal crystallite sizes with material properties is difficult for the time being, because of a superposition of material and process parameters both influencing the breakage behavior. To illustrate this problem the minimal crystallite sizes are shown for each material in relation to their Young's moduli in The Young's modulus is a measure for the resistance of a material against elastic deformation. If the Young's modulus is small, the material uses much of the inserted energy for deformation so that only a small amount is available for breakage. This might be an explanation for the large grinding limit of calcium carbonate in comparison with zirconia or tin oxide. Becker et al. The agglomeration of particles in a comminution process is the main influencing mechanism on the apparent grinding limit. With agglomeration experiments inside a stirred media mill under different stability conditions it was shown, that the final agglomerate size depends on the suspension stability as well as on the available shear forces in the milling chamber. Compared with real grinding experiments under the same stability conditions nearly the same steady state in particle size is reached. The particle size in an agglomerate-free suspension is only determined by actual particle breakage. A grinding limit is identified in long term experiments for different materials and could be characterized by the crystallite size measured by X-ray diffraction. This true grinding limit is the minimal achievable particle size under the applied milling conditions. It is assumed that the grinding limit is reached due to an insufficient amount of elastically stored energy in the particles. During the grinding process lattice imperfections are generated which enhance the amount of stored energy and lead together with the transferred energy from the milling beads to further particle breakage. The procedure of generating defects until the available elastic energy is large enough to fulfill the integral energy balance reduces the breakage kinetics in the nanometer range. The grinding limit is reached when the crystallites become so small that no defects can be stored in the lattice anymore. The total available energy at this critical crystallite size is insufficient and could not be increased by further milling. Accordingly, the generation of defects enables nanogrinding by increasing the elastically stored energy, but determines with its disappearance below a critical size concurrently the overall limit of grinding. The kinetics of particle breakage and the true grinding limit depend on material properties as well as on process parameters influencing the stress intensity. A correlation between those parameters and the particle size will be determined by a separation of the material function and the machine function in future works. This work was financially supported by the German Research Council (DFG) and the International Fine Particle Research Institute (IFPRI). We gratefully acknowledge Prof. Neubauer and Christoph Hesse of the Institute of Mineralogy for their support in analyzing the XRD patterns. Additionally, we thank the NETZSCH-Feinmahltechnik GmbH for providing the laboratory mill “LabStar”.