Stream sediment sampling is a well-known technique used to discover the geochemical anomalies in regional exploration activities. In an upstream catchment basin of stream sediment sample, the geochemical signals originating from probable mineralization could be diluted due to mixing with the weathering material coming from the non-anomalous sources. Hawkes’s equation (1976) was an attempt to overcome the problem in which the area size of catchment basin was used to remove dilution from geochemical anomalies. However, the metal content of a stream sediment sample could be linked to several geomorphological, sedimentological, climatic and geological factors. The area size is not itself a comprehensive representative of dilution taking place in a catchment basin. The aim of the present study was to consider a number of geomorphological factors affecting the sediment supply, transportation processes, storage and in general, the geochemistry of stream sediments and their incorporation in the dilution correction procedure. This was organized through employing the concept of sediment yield and sediment delivery ratio and linking such characteristics to the dilution phenomenon in a catchment basin. Main stream slope (MSS), relief ratio (RR) and area size (Aa) of catchment basin were selected as the important proxies (
                        
                           
                              P
                              
                                 S
                                 D
                                 
                                    R
                                    a
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     ) for sediment delivery ratio and then entered to the Hawkes’s equation. Then, Hawkes’s and new equations were applied on the stream sediment dataset collected from Takhte-Soleyman district, west of Iran for Au, As and Sb values. A number of large and small gold, antimony and arsenic mineral occurrences were used to evaluate the results. Anomaly maps based on the new equations displayed improvement in anomaly delineation taking the spatial distribution of mineral deposits into account and could present new catchment basins containing known mineralization as the anomaly class, especially in the case of Au and As. Four catchment basins having Au and As mineralization were added to anomaly class and also one catchment basin with known As occurrence was highlighted as anomalous using new approach. The results demonstrated the usefulness of considering geomorphological parameters in dealing with dilution phenomenon in a catchment basin.Geochemical survey based on stream sediment sampling is one of the most successful tools used in the regional exploration of mineral deposits. Stream sediment geochemistry is based on identifying secondary elemental dispersion halos caused by chemical or physical weathering and the erosion of upstream sources. In this regard, stream sediments are actually considered as the representative material of upstream rock compositions, i.e., lithological units distributed in a catchment basin. From the exploration point of view, in a catchment basin containing mineralized area(s), stream sediments delivered to the basin outlet consist of the mixing material originating from anomalous and non-anomalous upstream sources ( The metal content of a stream sediment sample and in general, the geochemistry of sediment in the catchment basin scale is affected by various hydrological, geomorphological, lithological, sedimentological and climatic factors ( In this paper, a procedure has been proposed to take into account the concept of sediment delivery ratio in the dilution correction of geochemical anomalies. The procedure includes entering some well-known parameters influencing the SDR, such as main stream slope, relief-length ratio and area size of catchment basins, to remove dilution phenomenon from the geochemical anomalies. Then the impact of introducing the above parameters into the existing formula has been examined over a stream sediment dataset from one of the high potential regions for mineral deposits containing known gold and polymetal occurrences in west of Iran. For stream sediment geochemical prospecting, each stream sediment sample is collected from the outlet of a catchment basin, so the question is whether all denudated materials from the upstream catchment basin are reached to the outlet or not? Or whether or not the rate of delivering the mixed upstream material to the outlet is similar among different catchment basins? In fact, not all sediments reaching to the stream courses are delivered to the outlet of the catchment basin. In order to explain this, there are sedimentological and geomorphological concepts, namely, sediment yield and sediment delivery ratio (SDR), that should be considered. The sediment yield (SY) is defined as the total amount of sediments that pass through the catchment basin outlet ( Sediment delivery ratio (SDR) is defined as the ratio of sediment yield to the entire amount of produced sediments through erosion processes in the upstream catchment basin of that measured point ( Slope characteristics are important in determining magnitude of sediment yield and sediment delivery ratio in a catchment basin ( According to definition offered by  In this paper, we applied the definition of relief ratio in an equation proposed by Catchment basins with large area sizes have a low sediment delivery ratio ( The study area was situated between the Urumieh-Dokhtar volcanic arc and the Sanandaj-Sirjan metamorphic zone, which are both extending over NW to SE of Iran. The Urumieh–Dokhtar volcanic arc was shaped during the northward subduction of the Neo-Tethys along the Zagros thrust ( The Takhte-Soleyman complex encompassed a NW–SE metamorphic rocks zone parallel to the Zagros orogeny with the age of Late Neoproterozoic–Early Cambrian being calculated by U The Takhte-Soleyman system consisted of several varieties of Ediacaran Cambrian orthogneissic rocks ( Numerous mineral deposits and indexes are in connection with volcanic–hydrothermal Cenozoic aged activity. Such examples are deposits of As Two main gold deposits throughout the study area were Zarshuran and Agh Darreh. These gold occurrences were situated in Miocene and Upper Proterozoic–Lower Cambrian age carbonate-rich sedimentary rocks, respectively. Some researchers believe that they may pertain to the same mineralization system because they exhibit several similar characteristics; also they have been linked to Carlin-type deposits ( Zarshuran, which is known as the largest gold deposit throughout the area, is a disseminated gold deposit with Precambrian black shale and carbonates hosts intruded by a vastly altered, weakly mineralized granitoid. This intrusion is responsible for fracturing the host formation and also, providing a promising site for hydrothermal mineralization. At Zarshuran district, main alterations were sericitization, decalcification, and kaolinitization ( Agh Darreh, the next biggest gold deposit in the Takht-Soleyman 1:100000 sheet, lies within an Oligo- Miocene limestone. Two hydrothermally altered and mineralized zones occurred- Agh Darreh East and Agh Darreh West-which were separated 1.5 km apart from each other. The considerable mineralization arose in jasperoid lenses located in the upper portion of the limestone. The jasperoids and the iron–manganese oxide were the main zones of the economic deposition of gold, together with arsenic, antimony, zinc, lead, silver and barium ( Stream sediment geochemical prospecting over Takhte-Soleyman 1:100000 sheet was conducted in order to discover new potential mineral deposits focused on Au and poly-metal mineralization (Geological Survey of Iran). As stated previously, the area is a well-known district due to its significant Au-bearing occurrences such as Zarshuran, Agh Darreh, Touzlar and Bayche Bagh, as well as several small epithermal Au Sample catchment basin (SCB) approach is based on assigning a zone of influence, namely, catchment basin, to each stream sediment sample and estimating the geochemical background due to upstream lithologies in that catchment basin. In order to draw stream courses and catchment basins, a digital elevation model (DEM) with the spatial resolution of 10 m was used. For the purpose of estimating the local geochemical background of Au, As and Sb due to upstream lithologies for each catchment basin over the study area, a technique introduced by The simple mathematical subtraction of local geochemical background (C In order to incorporate sediment delivery ratio in the procedure of dilution removal from geochemical anomalies, we utilized three indicators including main stream slope (MSS), relief ratio (RR) and catchment basin area with the power of −0.2 (A The summary statistics for main stream slope (MSS), relief ratio (RR) and A After calculating the geochemical background for each element due to lithologies, using SCB approach, and subtracting their values from the measured elemental contents of the stream sediment sample for each catchment basin (i.e. residual values), the residual values were multiplied by their corresponding catchment basin area size (A As can be seen from From an exploration point of view, an anomaly map which restricts occupied area of anomalies and also contains a higher number of mineral occurrences in a same time, could be more favorable to prospect the deposit-type sought ( As geochemical information may be integrated with the rest of exploration data through different data fusion techniques ( In the SCB approach, the position of stream sediment samples plays an important role in delineating large catchment basins in a study area, as such large catchment basins cause extreme values and can be subjected to anomaly class, but they may be actually unrelated to mineralization. Sediment delivery proxies as the complementary factors are the representatives for the efficiency of sediment transportation processes in different catchment basins. In the same condition, by assuming the presence of one anomalous source (mineralization), a catchment basin with steeper main stream slope is capable of delivering more percent of upstream produced sediments to the outlet and so, the possibility of masking geochemical signals from that of mineralization could be reduced. The employed definition for relief ratio examines the overall gradient across a catchment basin and the rate of sediment loss, especially at major headwaters. In terms of stream sediment geochemical exploration, corrected residuals using relief ratio and the main stream slope will likely provide more realistic results. The results of this research implied the importance of considering the geomorphological characteristics of catchment basins in the modeling of transportation, deposition and erosion processes. In a catchment basin, dilution of geochemical anomalies through stream courses is a dynamic complicated phenomenon influenced by several geomorphological, sedimentological, climatic and geological features. Also, the advantage of incorporating some proxies for a geomorphological concept, namely, sediment delivery ratio, into stream sediment geochemical modeling is that there is no need for further field measurements in regional stream sediment geochemical prospecting.