The purpose of this study was to evaluate the results of open reduction and internal fixation in a large series of posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum and to identify the factors that affect the outcomes in this case series. One hundred twenty-one patients who had undergone open reduction and internal fixation of a fracture of the posterior wall of the acetabulum were assessed at a mean of 53 months (range, 24–163) after surgery. The functional outcome was evaluated with use of the modified Merle d'Aubigne scoring system, the Harris Hip Score (HHS), and the Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36) questionnaire. Final follow-up radiographs were graded according to Matta's radiologic criteria. Patient, fracture, and radiographic variables were analyzed to identify possible associations with functional and radiographic outcome. The quality of fracture reduction on postoperative radiographs was anatomical in 115 hips (95.0%), satisfactory in 6 cases (5.0%), and unsatisfactory in none. Final modified d'Aubignè scores were excellent in 45 hips (40.2%), good in 52 (46.4%), fair in 7 (6.3%), and poor in 8 (7.1%). Mean HHS was 91.5±8.9 (48–100). The SF-36 scores were similar with respect to age and sex-matched norms, but physical domains in males remained lower in comparison with the normal population. The early reduction of an associated hip dislocation and quality of surgical reduction were strong positive predictors of functional and radiographic outcomes at follow-up, whereas associated injuries and the existence of pre-operative nerve palsy were negative predictors of patients' functionality. This study of surgically treated fractures of the posterior wall of the acetabulum has shown that functional and radiographic results are satisfactory in most patients, provided that prompt reduction of an associated hip dislocation and anatomical reduction of the fracture are carried out. Associated injuries and nerve lesions affect the final functional outcome.Fractures of the posterior wall, which account for approximately one-fourth of all acetabular fractures Displaced fractures of the posterior wall of the acetabulum should be reduced surgically to ensure a painless, mobile, and stable hip. However, previous published data have shown that a significant portion of operatively treated patients obtains poor outcomes despite the relatively simple fracture pattern To further compound these challenges is the fact that most of the studies that have reported the surgical results and assessed the potential prognostic factors specifically in fractures of the posterior wall of the acetabulum have been based upon relatively small case series, thereby producing less reliable analyses. Moreover, there is a paucity of published data on patients’satisfaction and self-reported health-related quality of life (HRQoL) as assessed by validated instruments In an effort to fill the void in the clinical and investigational literature on the outcomes of patients with fracture of the posterior wall of the acetabulum, we set out 1) to evaluate the results of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) in a large series of posterior wall fractures of the acetabulum by using validated instruments as well as an HRQoL assessment, and 2) to identify the factors that most likely affect the outcomes in this case series. One hundred and fifty patients were treated with ORIF for a displaced fracture of the posterior wall of the acetabulum between 1999 and 2014. Indications for operative treatment were an intra-articular displacement of more than 2 After discharge, patients underwent clinical and radiographic clinical examination at six months, one year, and annually thereafter. Files containing follow-up information were updated after each follow-up visit. Although only a few patients were examined at all of the follow-up intervals, all of them were examined at the final interval. The data collected from the final follow-up were used for this study. Out of 150 patients participating in the study, two died from unrelated causes less than two years after surgery and 27 were lost to follow-up, leaving 121 subjects available for the follow-up (survey rate At the time of the final follow-up, which occurred after a minimum interval of two years after surgery, the patients gave their informed consent to undergo clinical and radiographic examination. The clinical examination was carried out by one of the authors (SC) uninvolved in the surgical treatment of patients. Information regarding possible implant and medical complications, as well as possible reoperations that had occurred in the previous time interval, was collected during the follow-up visit. The instruments chosen to evaluate outcomes at the final follow-up were the modified Merle d’Aubigne scoring system A two- sample The baseline characteristic of patients who completed the follow-up are summarized in Of 113 patients available for the final radiographic examination, excellent results were detected in 85 hips (75.2%), good in 16 (14.2%), fair in 8 (7.1%), and poor in 4 (3.5%). Radiographic signs of OA and AVN were present in 9 (8%) and 3 (2.7%) patients, respectively. HO was detected in 22 patients (19.5%) and was graded Brooker I in 5 cases (22.7%), Brooker II in 7 cases (31.8%), Brooker III in 7 cases (31.8%), and Brooker IV in 3 cases (13.6%). No cases of breakage of the hardware, lysis around the screws, or postoperative infection were observed. In addition to the 8 patients who had undergone secondary THA, four patients had successful revision surgery for HO removal, thereby leading to a global 10.0% revision rate. At the final follow-up, both the HHS (c However, when patients with fracture-dislocation were examined separately, the early reduction of dislocation represented a protective factor from OA (OR Although fractures of the posterior wall are the most common acetabular fractures, surgical results of this particular lesion have rarely been addressed specifically in the literature. Indeed, in most cases, studies pertaining to these type of fractures are embedded in larger series encompassing a variety of acetabular fractures. Owing to their simple appearance on plain radiographs, posterior wall fractures have been classified as elementary fractures The main purpose of the present study was to evaluate the surgical outcomes in one of the largest series ever published of operatively treated posterior wall acetabular fractures with sufficient follow-up (a minimum of two years) evaluations. Satisfactory functional and radiographic results were obtained in 87% and 89% of our patients, respectively. Notably, the surgical outcomes of our patients were equal to or even better than those reported by other authors These results are not in line with previous studies reporting lower scores for both the physical and mental domains in patients who have undergone surgery for acetabular fracture when compared with a reference population Among the different complications arising from posterior wall acetabular fractures, HO was the most frequent at follow-up. In this regard, although the overall frequency of this complication (19.5%) in this study was slightly lower than that observed in previous studies of posterior wall fractures Other fracture-related complications are OA and AVN. In general, the frequency of OA and AVN after posterior wall fracture is 4–29% and 5–12%, respectively Although several studies have assessed the prognostic factors of posterior wall fractures, only a few have included a number of patients large enough to allow reliable analysis Delays in the reduction of hip dislocation seem instead to favor the development of fracture-related complications, including OA and AVN In our multiple regression analysis, associated injuries and/or pre-operative nerve palsy represented independent negative predictors of functional outcome and quality of life at follow-up. We speculate that the concurrence of these lesions may have an obvious impact on the long-term functionality and quality of life of individuals with posterior wall acetabular fracture, mainly in the case of absent or incomplete recovery over time. This theory is strongly supported by previous studies indicating that patients suffering from associated injuries have a worse functional outcome than those suffering an isolated fracture of acetabulum Previous studies have indicated that the fracture morphology including comminution We do acknowledge that some features of the present study are non-ideal. Indeed, its retrospective nature is a limitation, but most series of posterior wall acetabular fractures share this study design. Plain radiographs are inadequate to assess the quality of fracture reduction accurately. However, the determination of anatomical reduction in this study was based on a combination of surgical observations and imaging findings. Undoubtedly, a systematic use of postoperative CT would have provided a more detailed analysis of acetabular morphology after surgery. The amount of variance accounted for by our models of multiple regression analysis demonstrates that there may be other prognostic variables in addition to those identified in the current study, thereby warranting further research. Finally, conclusions drawn from a study with a two-year minimum follow-up are not necessarily definitive. We do realize that slow progression of arthritic changes can lead to deterioration of clinical results. Nevertheless, the two-year functional results in these fractures usually remain stable over a long period of time Despite these limitations, our study does have methodological strengths. As we have mentioned throughout the paper, although posterior wall acetabular fractures have relatively simple fracture patterns, a significant percentage of patients experience poor surgical outcomes owing to the influence of a wide array of hidden factors that can be either surgeon-dependent or surgeon independent. Moreover, there is still a substantial lack of specific clinical and investigational data on the outcomes of patients with fracture of the posterior wall of the acetabulum. Most of the available literature comprises relatively small case series. Thus, the main strength of this study is that it provides one of the largest series including only patients with fracture of the posterior wall of the acetabulum treated at a single institution, with all cases operated on by the same surgeon and almost all of them were available for follow-ups. The preoperative assessment by careful radiographic and CT analysis permitted us to accurately evaluate the effect of fracture morphology on the outcomes while simultaneously controlling for the possible influences of multiple covariables. Lastly, the analysis of reference values and MCIDs for the SF-36′s scores warranted comparison with age and sex-matched norms at follow-up. In conclusion, this study of surgically treated fractures of the posterior wall of the acetabulum has shown that functional and radiographic results are satisfactory in most patients, with high levels of self-reported satisfaction. The two-year SF-36 scores are similar with respect to age and sex-matched norms, but physical domains in males remain lower in comparison with the normal population. Anatomic reduction of fracture and early reduction of concurrent hip dislocation are crucial to achieve good functional results and to prevent the development of late degenerative changes in the hip joint. Patients with associated injuries or post-traumatic nerve palsy experience worst functional outcomes and HRQoL at follow-up in comparison with patients with uncomplicated fractures. All authors declare they do not have any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence (bias) the work.