This paper describes the effect of zinc ions on copper speciation and adsorption on activated carbon in solutions with varied cyanide levels and containing calcium. Batch and column adsorption experiments were carried out under atmospheric conditions at different levels of CN/Cu using two types of activated carbon. Raman analysis shows that CN/Cu molar ratio, ionic strength (by adding calcium ions to the solution), and zinc ions can be used to control copper speciation in cyanide solutions. The addition of Zn2+ to cyanide solutions causes the conversion of CN− and Cu(CN)4
                     3− species to Cu(CN)3
                     2−, and the concomitant formation of Zn(CN)4
                     2−, regardless of cyanide concentration and ionic strength. As Cu(CN)3
                     2− has a high affinity for the solid surface, copper adsorption was favored. The co-addition of Ca2+ to the solutions produces an even larger enhancement of copper adsorption on activated carbon and has no effect on zinc adsorption. Column experiments show a significant reduction in the volume of cyanide solution to be further treated and an important increase in the concentration of copper. These findings may aid in the design of copper and cyanide recovery strategies.In nature, gold is usually found in association with other metals, mostly silver, iron, and copper. The occurrence of copper minerals in gold deposits, typically in the form of secondary sulfides, affects the leaching process due to their fast and high dissolution rate in the cyanide media ( The environmental restrictions to the disposal of effluents containing cyanide and metal cyanocomplexes in tailings dams, combined with the costs associated with cyanide consumption, make cyanide recovery and recycling a relevant issue to gold industry. Cyanide recovery and recycling is especially relevant where significant concentrations of metal cyanocomplexes, such as copper, are present in cyanidation tailings. The classic AVR (acidification, volatilization, reneutralization) process and its variations for cyanide recycling are not able to recover copper cyanocomplexes. SART (sulfidization, acidification, recycling and thickening) technology has become one of the main options to treat effluents with a high concentration of copper cyanide. In this process, sulfide ions and acid are added to cyanidation tailings to precipitate copper sulfide, which is then thickened and filtered. The HCN gas is released and recycled to gold cyanidation. A detailed description of the process can be found elsewhere ( Among the potential alternatives in this regard, the use of ion exchange resins, including its advantages and limitations has been revised ( The concentration of copper cyanide solutions by means of adsorption on activated carbon, a process well established in the gold industry, appears to be an option that warrants further study. The addition of reactive ions to the cyanide solution, such as Zn In this context, the main objective of the present investigation was to evaluate the effect of zinc ions on copper cyanide speciation and adsorption on different types of activated carbon. A reduction in the volume and concentration of copper in a cyanide solution to be treated is expected to favor the subsequent stages of copper and cyanide recoveries. In this work, two types of activated carbon samples were used: one sample produced from coconut shell (sample C) and one from The activated carbon samples were characterized according to the (i) specific surface area; (ii) ash content; (iii) density of surface functional groups; (iv) point of zero charge (PZC) and (v) morphology. The specific surface area was determined by the Brunauer, Emmett, and Teller (BET) method using a Quantachrome (NovaWin2) analyzer. The ash content was determined by the weight loss of each sample, after heating in a porcelain crucible at 900 The density of surface functional groups and the identification of the corresponding groups was determined by the Boehm method ( The PZC value of the activated carbon samples was obtained according to the procedure described by The morphology of both activated carbon samples was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled to energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS), using a JEOL (JSM 6360 LV) microscope equipped with a ThermoNoran (Quest) spectrometer. The micrographs were obtained using a 20 Adsorption data were obtained at 25 With regard to the experimental procedure, 1.0 Adsorption data were obtained at 25 To evaluate the desorption of copper and zinc from the activated carbon, elution tests were carried out as well. Initially, the loaded solid was rinsed by percolating Milli-Q water at 10 Raman spectroscopy was used to assess the effect of zinc ions on copper speciation. The identification of copper and zinc cyanocomplexes in the solutions was carried out with a Horiba Jobin Yvon (Labram HR 800) spectrograph equipped with a 633 Sample C is granular (particle size varying between 1.5 and 2.1 The characterization of the activated carbon samples on the basis of density of surface functional groups revealed that sample C has a smaller total density than sample E: 1.5 and 6.2 The PZC values of the activated carbon samples were 6.8 (sample C) and 7.2 (sample E). Below the PZC values, the surface of the adsorbent materials has a net positive charge; the functional groups are protonated. Above the PZC values, the surface then has a net negative charge, since some groups are deprotonated. Therefore, at pH  The effect of zinc ions on copper speciation, under varied CN/Cu ratios and ionic strength is shown in In summary, the Raman analysis indicated that the addition of zinc ions to the cyanide solutions leads to the conversion of CN The thermodynamic stability of the copper cyanocomplexes in the absence and presence of zinc ions in the cyanide solution was evaluated with the help of speciation curves. The speciation curves were obtained by calculating the corresponding concentrations of the copper cyanocomplexes, assuming ideal systems. A list of species with their respective thermodynamic parameters is provided in  In the presence of calcium ions in solution, copper adsorption increases (  Copper adsorption also increases in the presence of zinc ions in the cyanide solution, as shown by The combined effect of calcium and zinc ions on copper adsorption is shown in From initial and final concentrations of copper and zinc in the cyanide solutions, the selective adsorption of Cu(CN) Then, calcium ion addition slightly enhanced copper adsorption, but it did not affect zinc adsorption. This finding could be explained by the interaction between the Ca Finally, it is important to highlight that the highest amount of copper adsorbed was obtained in the presence of calcium ions in a solution with CN/Cu equal to 3 without zinc ions. However, similar amounts of copper were adsorbed in the presence of calcium and zinc ions in solutions with higher levels of cyanide. Zinc is a common element in gold cyanidation due to gold cementation with zinc powder. The presence of zinc cyanocomplex in gold cyanidation is not expected to affect gold cyanidation, as the zinc complex is much weaker than the gold cyanocomplex.    When the loading ( The effect of zinc ions on copper speciation and adsorption on activated carbon in solutions with varied cyanide levels and containing calcium is investigated. Batch adsorption experiments indicates that the highest amount of copper adsorbed on activated carbon is obtained in a solution with CN/Cu equal to 3 in the absence of zinc. But in the presence of zinc, similar copper adsorption is obtained even in solutions with high levels of cyanide concentration. Raman analysis shows that the addition of Zn The authors would like to thank the Center of Microscopy/UFMG for the analyses. The financial support from the Brazilian agencies (