Ca3Co4O9+δ ceramic is a potential p-type thermoelectric material for high temperature applications, however, its thermoelectric performance is limited by the strongly interrelated thermoelectric parameters. In this work, we develop an effective method to simultaneously tune the electrical and thermal transport properties of Ca3Co4O9+δ. We firstly synthesize Ca3Co4O9+δ powders and subsequently obtain surface modified Cu/Ca3Co4O9+δ through a well-controlled electroless plating technique followed by a fast Spark Plasma Sintering process. The detailed characterizations of microstructures and chemical compositions of Cu/Ca3Co4O9+δ samples suggest that the plated Cu has been doped into the Ca3Co4O9+δ after sintering. The doped Cu substitutes Ca ions, creates local oxygen deficiency and increases the ratios of Co3+ and Co4+, which reduces the carrier concentration and induces Ca-missed regions, thus, reducing the electrical and thermal conductivity. This study indicates that introducing metallic Cu phase by chemical electroless technique is a promising method to tune the thermoelectric properties of Ca3Co4O9+δ-based ceramics by altering the chemical composition and microstructures.Thermoelectric (TE) materials, which are able to directly convert heat into electricity and Oxides-based TE materials, including NaCo In this work, metallic Cu was plated on the surface of polycrystalline CCO particles by a well-controlled electroless plating process following by a fast Spark Plasma Sintering (SPS) process to modify the surface state of CCO. We characterize the microstructure and the chemical composition of Cu/CCO samples to understand the effects of plated Cu on TE performances of CCO. The results show that the plated Cu can significantly alter the composition and microstructures of CCO, therefore, tuning the electrical transport properties and Calcium nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO The CCO precursor powders were synthesized by a chemical coprecipitation method. Ca(NO The powder and bulk samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), recorded by an XRD diffractometer (Shimazu, XRD-6100) at room temperature with Cu-Kα radiation ( All the transport properties of bulk samples were measured perpendicular to the pressing direction from 323 K to 973 K.   TE properties of the as-sintered CCO and Cu/CCO are examined. The temperature-dependent The To clarify the mechanism of how the plated Cu affect the TE properties of CCO, we comprehensively characterize the as-sintered samples and the results of CCO and 1.2 wt%.Cu/CCO are presented for comparison. XPS analysis has been used to investigate the bonding states of samples after SPS and the results are shown in  In this study, we have synthesized Ca  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the