Two types of hydrothermally stable MOFs, ZIF-8 and MIL-53(Al) with different size and morphology, were prepared and used as supports for catalysts for synthesis of hydrocarbons from CO2 hydrogenation. XRD patterns proves that all these two types of MOFs materials could be stable under the reaction conditions (P
                     =3MPa; T
                     =573K) with water as byproduct. MOFs as a novel porous materials show excellent properties on catalysis compared with traditional supports γ-Al2O3 and the type of MOF supports has a significant impact on the activity and selectivity of Fe catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation. Due to the acidity of supports, ZIF-8 supports show different levels of considerable light olefins selectivity, while all MIL-53 supports nearly could not obtain light olefins. The light olefins selectivity of ZIF-8 is also affected by the secondary reaction of hydrogenation during the internal diffusion process. In this article, catalyst with high active and high light olefins selectivity was obtained just by modulating the MOFs supports.Owing to the global greenhouse effect which is related to the rising level of CO Metal organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of hybrid materials built from the coordination of metal ions or clusters with organic ligands CO 1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid (H MIL-53(Al) was accomplished using a solvothermal synthesis method. In a typical synthesis, AlCl ZIF-8 crystals with different size were synthesized as previously reported with little modulation Size- and morphology-controlled MIL-53 and ZIF-8 were used as the support materials. The Fe The catalytic hydrogenation of carbon dioxide was carried out in a pressurized fixed-bed flow reactor (inner diameter 8 Products were analyzed by an on-line FULI GC97 gas chromatograph. CO, CO Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of fresh and used catalysts were recorded on a Rigaku SmartLab(9) diffractometer, using Cu Kα X-rays at a scanning rate of 8°/min between 5° and 80°. The tube voltage and current used were 40  Catalytic activity and product selectivity of the five catalysts are shown in The framework structures of fresh and used catalysts were determined using X-ray diffraction ( Porosity is a unique characteristic of MOFs. Their microporous structures provide high surface areas and large pore volumes, together with a large variety of pore dimensions and topologies, which have triggered an extensive investigation into their application for gas separation and storage, drug delivery and catalysis The acidity of In consideration of the chosen supports, all the different kinds of MOFs exists a large amount of organic components in the structure. Therefore, MOFs show a great CO To explore more applications for MOFs as excellent materials, a series of ZIF-8 and MIL-53(Al) with different sizes and morphologies were prepared and used as hydrothermally stable supports for catalysts for CO This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: