Locking plates might offer a biomechanical fixation advantage for distal fibula fractures with comminution or osteoporotic bone. In January 2011, our unit introduced a bone-specific locking plate for the distal fibula. The aim of the present study was to compare it against more conventional plating system implants for lateral malleolar fixation in terms of outcomes, crude costs, and complications. We retrospectively reviewed a consecutive cohort of patients with closed ankle fractures who presented within a 24-month period. The clinical and radiographic outcomes were compared among conventional plating using a one-third semitubular plate, a 3.5-mm limited-contact dynamic compression plate, and a 2.7-mm/3.5-mm locking compression distal fibula plate. A total of 145 patients with ankle fractures underwent surgical fixation: 87 (60.0%) with the semitubular plate, 22 (15.2%) with the limited-contact dynamic compression plate, and 36 (24.8%) with the locking compression distal fibula plate. A greater proportion of patients with established osteoporosis or osteoporosis risk factors were in the locking compression distal fibula plate group (27.8% versus 2.3% and 0%). Four patients (2.8%) required washout for infection. No significant differences were found between the sex distribution within the 3 groups (p = .432). No significant difference was found in the complication rate (p = .914) or the reoperation rate (p = .291) among the 3 groups. Although costing >6 times more than a standard fibula fixation construct (implant cost), bone-specific locking compression distal fibula plates add to the portfolio of implants available, especially for unstable fractures with poor bone quality.Ankle malleolar fractures are common injuries, constituting approximately 9% of all fractures The technique of surgical fixation used can be influenced by the fracture pattern, soft tissue injury, and bone quality. Conventional fracture plating systems depend on adequate bone quality to achieve sound fixation and maintain construct stability. Loosening or toggling of screws as a result of poor fixation, with resulting loss of friction between the plate and bone, can lead to failure of fixation In January 2011, a bone-specific locking plate for the distal fibula with a cluster of 2.4- and 2.7-mm distal screws and 3.5-mm proximal screws was made available to our institution. This implant is contoured and provides a unicortical locking system in the distal part to allow fixation in metaphyseal bone. It also has 2 plate types, dependent on the position of the fracture, a lateral and a posterolateral distal fibula plate. The purpose of the present study was to review the use of the bone-specific distal fibula locking plate and compare implant selection for all lateral malleolus fixation using 3 different plates. We retrospectively examined a consecutive cohort of patients with malleolar ankle fractures. This service evaluation assessed the cost (implant cost) and incidence of complications of bone-specific locking versus more conventional lateral nonlocking plating systems for closed displaced fibular fractures. We retrospectively reviewed a consecutive cohort of patients admitted within the 24-month period from January 2011 for fixation of closed malleolar fractures of the ankle. Open ankle fractures, pilon fractures, injuries treated with an external fixator, fractures treated with syndesmotic screws only, and isolated medial malleolar fractures were excluded. Complications, including reoperation and subsequent removal of hardware, were recorded from the clinical data for the next 2 years. The implant costs were calculated using the price to our institution. (Our aim was to simply look at the crude cost of the implants, and not to analyze cost effectiveness, which would require identification of quality-adjusted life years, incremental cost differences, and the perspective of the analyses.) Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS, version 22 (IBM, Armonk, NY). Data were tested for normality using a Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Nonparametric data were analyzed using a Kruskal-Wallis test, and differences were tested using pair-wise Mann-Whitney All patients received antibiotic prophylaxis with a single dose of a second-generation cephalosporin unless allergic to penicillin, in which case they received teicoplanin according to the hospital protocol. The choice of implant and use of lag screws was left to the discretion of the operating surgeon. The implants available during the study period were a one-third semitubular plate (STP), a 3.5-mm limited-contact dynamic compression plate (LC-DCP), and a 2.7-mm/3.5-mm locking compression distal fibula plate (LCP-F). All 3 plates were manufactured by DePuy Synthes (West Chester, PA). Drains were not routinely used. All patients received low-molecular-weight heparin as thromboprophylaxis from 6 hours postoperatively for the duration of plaster cast immobilization. Radiographs were obtained at 6 weeks postoperatively and at further follow-up examinations, if deemed necessary, until clinical and radiographic union were achieved. All radiographs of the pre- and postoperative ankles were assessed by 2 independent observers (S.L., C.M.), and the interval to radiographic union was noted. If no consensus was reached, the senior author (M.J.O.) determined the case. Data on osteoporotic risk factors were collected, including established osteoporosis, previous fragility fracture, glucocorticoid usage, cigarette smoking, alcohol excess, rheumatoid arthritis, and diabetes mellitus. From January 2011 to December 2012, 145 patients with ankle fractures underwent surgical fixation with a distal fibular plate. Of the 145 patients, 87 (60.0%) received an STP, 22 (15.2%) an LC-DCP, and 36 (24.8%) an LCP-F. The descriptive characteristics of the 3 groups stratified by plate and fracture type are listed in The mean hardware costs are listed in The mean interval to full weightbearing was 6.9 weeks for the STP group, 7.2 weeks for the LC-DCP group, and 7.6 weeks for the LCP-F group ( The complications and reoperations required stratified by group are listed in The STP group included 2 patients who required washout for infection (1 underwent revision to an external fixator and 1 underwent metal removal and fusion 2 years later). In addition, 14 patients underwent metalwork removal for pain, stiffness, or screws backing out, 1 patient underwent plate revision, 1 underwent the addition of syndesmosis screws, and the previous 2 who had undergone revision because of infection. The LC-DCP plate group included 1 patient who required washout and removal of metal for infection. In addition, symptomatic metalwork was removed in 3 patients. The LCP-F group included 1 patient who had required washout and removal of metal for infection, 1 patient who underwent removal of symptomatic metalwork for pain, 1 who underwent revision with the addition of syndesmosis screws, and 1 patient with nonunion who underwent revision to fusion. We have described a consecutive cohort of 145 patients who underwent malleolar ankle fixation during a 2-year period with a 2-year follow-up period. The introduction of the bone-specific implant was reviewed to assess the use and cost implications. In the present retrospective review, we noted that the fibula locking plate was more likely to be selected for the older population, those with established osteoporosis, or those with osteoporosis risk factors. Despite these adverse indicators, no significant difference was found in the complication rate. This supports the increasing body of evidence that locking plate fixation is useful in osteoporotic bone or multifragmentary fractures Biomechanical studies conducted on cadavers have shown that contoured locking plates for distal fibular fractures in osteoporotic bone have greater torque and angle at failure compared with conventional plates Locking plates also offer a mechanical advantage in unstable, multifragmentary fractures. We observed an increased use of the LCP-F compared with other plates in trimalleolar fractures. The higher energy nature of trimalleolar fractures could explain this, because the higher energy is likely to result in more unstable and comminuted fractures, necessitating fixation with a locking construct. Biomechanical studies by Takemoto et al The distal fibula is a subcutaneous bone without overlying muscle. Wound problems, including skin irritation from metalwork, infection, and delayed wound healing are common postoperative complications after fixation of lateral ankle fractures Schepers et al The LCP-F implant is more expensive (~£500) than a standard fibula fixation construct. However, this should be balanced against the cost of further intervention for patients in whom osteoporotic bone or unstable fractures could be expected to increase the risk of displacement requiring further surgery The present retrospective study was limited because the choice of implant was not randomized but was left to the discretion of the operating surgeon. We have, however, provided a pragmatic review of the fixation, complications, and costs to the institution. We also realize that our assessment of costs only considered the crude cost of the implant, and was not a rigorous analysis of cost effectiveness. These results mirror those from other studies, which showed no significant differences between locking and nonlocking plates in terms of radiographic bone union In conclusion, bone-specific LCP-Fs add to the portfolio of implants available. They provide rigid fixation with a stable construct and thus are particularly attractive for multifragmentary fractures and patients with poor bone quality. Their unit cost is significantly greater than that of STPs and LC-DCPs but they provide a satisfactory alternative for those patients in whom and fracture patterns in which fixation is more likely to fail using nonlocking techniques.