Objectives
                  to report and evaluate the functional outcome of plate fixation in comminuted olecranon fractures (Mayo types IIB and IIIB).
               
                  Method
                  23 consecutive patients with comminuted fractures of the olecranon presenting to our unit Between Feb 2011 and Jan 2015, at a mean follow-up of thirty-six months. Main outcome measurements include radiographic healing, post-operative range of motion, complications, outcome score and patient satisfaction.
               
                  Results
                  Our study included thirteen females and ten males with a mean age of 55(18–97). Fourteen were Mayo type IIB and nine were Mayo type IIIB. Eighteen patients had no complications post-operatively with good outcome with mean oxford score of 45, full rotational ROM and mean flexion arc of 20–130°. Five patients had range of motion between 40–90° with full rotational ROM and mean oxford score of 24. Two patients out of five required metal work removal. No non-unions were noted in our series.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Plate fixation of complex olecranon fracture is an effective, reliable method of treatment with low risk of non-union. Restoration of a functional flexion arc of movement can be expected with application of correct technique.Olecranon fracture is a fairly common injury. Olecranon fractures account for 5–7% of elbow fractures in adults but are much rarer in children We evaluated locking plate fixation of comminuted olecranon fractures in terms of bone union, surgical complications, long term outcomes and patients’ satisfaction. This case series has been reported in line with the PROCESS criteria We retrospectively studied 23 patients with comminuted fractures of the olecranon. The mean follow-up period was 36 months ranging from 24 to 52 months. There were thirteen females and ten males with mean age of fifty five years [range, 18–97 According to The Mayo classification system; fourteen patients had Mayo type IIB and nine had Mayo type IIIB ( Operations were performed either under general anaesthesia with local anaesthetic infiltration or regional block. The mean tourniquet time was 48 All the patients were put in a broad arm sling post-operatively. They were allowed wrist and hand exercise immediately post-operatively. Patients were seen two weeks after the surgery in the outpatient clinic, had a wound check and started gentle elbow exercise. The outcome was assessed with regard to clinical and radiological findings. We utilised The Oxford elbow scoring system which has twelve components with five answer options each. Each answer is scored zero to four, with zero corresponding to greater severity. Underlying the twelve components are three spheres: Elbow pain, Elbow function and Social-psychological. Scores are converted to a metric of zero — 48 (lower score corresponding to greater severity) These fractures were deemed to be unsuitable for Tension band fixation by virtue of their fracture configuration. There were no infections, wound leakages or wound break-downs reported on any of these cases. full union was observed in all patients during the follow-up period. one patient had a grade II open fracture that was debrided and fixed internally at the same time. All operations were performed within seventy-two hours from the initial injury. The majority (Nineteen cases) was performed within 24 A congruent Ulno-humeral articulation was achieved in all the patients; the reduction obtained during surgery was maintained in all cases when seen for follow-up. There were no implant failures. No complications were noted post-operatively in eighteen patients with a mean oxford score of 46. Two patient (out of eighteen), had a transient Neuropraxia of the ulnar nerve which was diagnosed pre-operatively and had resolved fully within the first six weeks. Five patients had a range of motion between 40–90 One case of a type IIB was an open fracture that was debrided and fixed in the same sitting, and had an uneventful recovery with no acute or late surgical complications. One patient had a closed comminuted fracture with a 4.7 All olecranon fractures are intra-articular and present a challenge when they are multi-fragmented. The outcome of the surgical treatment always depends directly on the precision of the joint reduction, restoration of mechanical stability that permits prompt mobilisation, respect for the soft tissues, and maintaining an intact extensor mechanism The aim of surgery is to achieve an adequate stability to the fracture and to reconstruct the joint surface to enable range-of motion exercises in the early post-operative period Fyfe et al. conducted a biomechanical study on methods of fixation of olecranon fractures and concluded that fragmented osteotomies had best stability when fixed using the contoured plates Hard ware irritation is often reported with plate fixation and hardware removal rates are reported to be 0% to 20% in the literature Hume and Wiss in 1992 studied the outcomes of plate fixation against tension band wiring in variable patterns of olecranon fractures and found superior results clinically and radiologically with lower complication rate in the plate fixation group Based on the previous biomechanical studies and the published case series, we believe that Plate fixation is mandatory in fragmented, unstable olecranon fractures. Using the pre-contoured locking plates helps to maintain the olecranon height and restoring the articular arc which is very important to avoid flexion-extension stiffness and enable commencing early movements. Furthermore, low profile pre-contoured plates reduce the need for metal work removal. We have mostly used a spanning type of fixation construct but in some complex fractures, we have used sub-articular screws to buttress the articular surface. We found that; fractures with multiple small and comminuted intervening fragments in addition to the major fragments, they may not do well after surgery. Thus, further detailed imaging and planning before the surgery might help getting better results. The limitations of our study include its retrospective nature, the small number of patients and the relatively short duration of follow-up. Plate fixation should be considered as the method of choice in comminuted olecranon fractures where tension band wire technique will not provide the required reduction and stability. The plate acts as a posterior buttress/template, supporting the articular fragments till fracture consolidation is complete. Plate fixation is an effective and reliable way of treatment with a very low risk of non-union. None. No funding from any organisation. Not required. Not required. 1st Author contributed to design, data collection, data analysis and interpretation and writing of the paper. Co-authors contributed in data collection and writing of the paper. Mohammed Ali.