Studies on preparing manganese–zinc ferrites by coprecipitation method using spent Zn–Mn batteries have been carried out to determine the influential factors on preparing process, including coprecipitation pH value, coprecipitation temperature and calcining temperature, etc. Results show that the suitable preparing conditions are: coprecipitation pH value, 7–7.5; copecipitation temperature, 50 °C and calcining temperature, 1100–1150 °C. It also finds that Fe powder is the suitable material to remove Hg existing in spent Zn–Mn batteries completely.In recent years, numerous studies have been done on recycling spent Zn–Mn batteries, which can be summarized into two categories: pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy. The disadvantages with pyrometallurgy are high cost, much energy and complicated operation, etc.; and those with hydrometallurgy have low purity and low added value of recycling products and easily leading to secondary pollution and so on The purpose of this work is to find a way to recover used Zn–Mn batteries by combining the advantages with pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy. The target product is not a single metal or its oxide but Mn–Zn ferrites with high added value. Mn–Zn ferrites have a cubic structure and belong to an important class of soft magnetic materials, which are widely used in many electronic and magnetic applications, such as in transformers, noise filters, and recording heads, due to their high magnetic permeabilities and low magnetic losses The spent Zn–Mn batteries (Xinxiang Battery Plant, China) used as source materials to prepare Mn–Zn ferrites were first dissolved in 3 mol/l H Individual grains of the resulting product, Manganese–Zinc ferrites, were inspected and analyzed using transmission electron microscopy [Model JEM-100SX, JEOL, Japan] and scanning electron microscopy [Model AMRAY-1000B, AMRAY, US]. The ferrites of solids were identified from XRD (Model BRUKER.axs, BRUKER, Germany) patterns and the spinel ratio (spinel%) is defined by the following equation: Fe powder, FeCl Obviously, Fe powder is the suitable material to supplement the inadequate amount of iron on the process of preparing Mn–Zn ferrites, which can remove Hg existing in spent Zn–Mn batteries less than 0.2 ppb.  At lower pH value (pH=6.0–7.0), the major precipitates in the solution are the carbonates of iron, manganese and zinc. The following reaction occurs: With the increase in pH, the concentration of CO To obtain precise metal ion stoichiometry, it is necessary to achieve precipitation yield Thus, pH value between 7.0 and 7.5 was found to be the ideal pH value to maintain the initial stoichiometry (Mn  The precipitates, conducted at pH value 7.5, temperature 50 °C, are used to study the effect of calcining temperature. Calcined powders are denoted as CX, where X=1000∼1150 standing for calcining temperature (°C). XRD patterns of calcined powders In low temperature(1000–1080 °C), the consolidation reaction of Fe The mean crystallite size of the sample calcined at 1130 °C for 2 h has been estimated from XRD linewidth of the(311) peak using the Scherrer equation:  Fe powder is the suitable material to supplement insufficient amount of Fe on the process of preparing Mn–Zn ferrites using spent Zn–Mn batteries, which can remove Hg existing in spent Zn–Mn batteries completely. The suitable preparing conditions are: coprecipitation pH value, 7.0–7.5; coprecipitation temperature, 50 °C and calcining temperature, 1100–1150 °C. Under the above mentioned preparing conditions, it can maintain precise metal ion stoichiometry (Mn The maximum crystallite size of the Mn–Zn ferrites calcined at 1130 °C for 2 h is below 30 nm, and the mean crystallite size is 22.4 nm. The authors are grateful to Prof. Dingxi Cheng for the measurement of the concentration of metal ion.