This study was a retrospective review of 18 patients with 19 pilon fractures treated with limited incision reduction and percutaneous plate fixation of the tibia. Patients were treated with either a 1- or 2-stage protocol. The latter consisted of placement of an external fixator followed by definitive reduction. The emphasis of analysis was placed on the identification of complications to the soft tissue envelope or bone-healing problems within the first 6 months after surgery. A major complication was defined as an unplanned operation within the first 6 months. Minor complications were any superficial wound defects that did not require operative intervention to resolve or any malunion or delayed union. With this protocol, no major complications were encountered. Minor complications were identified in 4 patients (4 fractures) of which 2 were minor wound problems. One patient developed a malunion, and the other had a delayed union. Four patients requested removal of prominent hardware. These results indicate that limited incision reduction and percutaneous plate fixation lead to safe methods of stabilization. The authors also provide guidance and strategies for the consistent execution of this technique.Fractures of the tibial plafond are complex injuries that are often associated with severe soft tissue injury. The character and pattern of skeletal injury vary depending on forces imparted to the distal tibia at the time of injury and can vary from simple rotational fracture patterns to severe articular comminution with metaphyseal defects and severe soft issue injury. This combination of osseous and soft tissue pathology creates an intellectual and technical challenge in treatment. Failure to appreciate the soft issue damage with any injury predictably leads to unforgiving complications. Historically, surgical management of the higher energy variety had significant complications ( Although the outcomes are dependent on several factors, the optimal technique for surgical correction of more complicated pilon fractures remains controversial ( The ideal method of treatment would achieve excellent articular reduction and stability while minimizing soft tissue compromise and devascularization of the fracture fragments. To achieve this, a 2-stage protocol has been recommended, which consists of initial use of external fixation until the soft tissue envelope recovers sufficiently to allow for definitive ORIF of the tibia ( This review focuses on the identification of soft tissue complications in the short-term perioperative period. Patients who sustained pilon fractures that were treated with operative reduction and percutaneous delivery fixation were included in the study. Inclusion criteria were a limited or percutaneous incisional approach and percutaneous delivery of tibial fixation. Patients meeting these criteria who were operated on by 2 of the authors (J. M. S. and S. M. R.) over the past 3 years were retrospectively reviewed. All patients received their follow-up care with their respective surgeon. Complications were defined as minor or major depending on the severity of the wound. Major complications were defined as events that required an unplanned operation as a direct result of morbidity from the fracture or the treatment method such as osteotomies for malunions or nonunions, deep infections, wounds requiring soft tissue coverage, and failures of fixation ( Patients were evaluated in the emergency room where initial resuscitative maneuvers were performed if necessary. Primary assessment of the extremity was performed with respect to deformity, damage to soft tissue, and characterization of injury based on the mechanism. Open fractures were treated with emergent irrigation and debridement in the operating room. The primary indications for immediate external fixation were open fractures, grossly unstable fractures, significant shortening, and severe soft tissue damage ( Thin-section computed tomography (CT) images were obtained after fixator placement to assist in incision placement and reconstruction. Definitive operative reduction was performed after sufficient time had elapsed for recovery of the soft tissue envelope. The latency between injury and definitive surgical treatment was determined by the surgeon, but was based on the recovery of the soft tissue envelope. In those cases without open wounds or blisters, resolution of ankle edema and return of skin lines were the most common determinants. At the time of definitive reduction, the external fixator, if present, was removed. Fibular fractures were reduced and plated with a one-third tubular plate or reconstruction plate through an open or percutaneous technique. Attention was then directed to the distal tibial where the primary incision was made over the dominant fracture line as determined by CT scan ( A distal tibial locking plate was then tunneled subcutaneously through a 1.5-cm vertical incision just distal to the medial malleolus. The corridor for passage of the plate was developed in an extraperiosteal fashion with a long, curved packing forceps ( Eighteen patients, 12 men and 6 women, with a total of 19 tibial plafond fractures were identified. The average patient age was 43.4 years (range, 18-74 years). The mechanism of injury for 74% (n = 14) of patients was a high-energy axial load including 7 falls from a height, 4 vehicular accidents (car, motorcycle, and jet ski) and 3 pedestrian versus automobile. The remaining 26% (n = 5) of fractures were the result of low-energy injury mechanical falls. Fifteen patients had associated fibular fractures, and 3 patients sustained ipsilateral metatarsal fractures. One patient had a contralateral ankle fracture. The fractures were classified according to the AO-ASIF system ( External fixation was initially used in 8 patients. Two of these had open fractures, 3 had fracture blisters, and 3 more required the external fixator for gross instability or loss of length. In 15 cases, an ancillary limited incision was necessary to achieve tibial articular reduction. Three cases were treated with arthroscopic assistance. Of the 15 concomitant fibula fractures, 3 were plated percutaneously. In 1 case, the fibula fracture was stable and well aligned and did not require fixation. The remaining 11 were treated with ORIF. The average delay to definitive treatment for all 18 patients was 11.2 days (range, < 24 hours to 52 days). The 2 patients with open fractures had the longest delays of 35 and 52 days until definitive treatment. According to the established criteria, no major local complications were identified. However, 4 minor local complications, including 2 wounds, 1 delayed union, and 1 mild valgus malunion, were identified in this series. These 2 wound problems represented an 11% complication rate. One medial ankle wound (patient 14) required 2 courses of oral antibiotics followed by hardware removal but healed without further complication. The second wound problem (patient 4) was a partial-thickness ulceration located over the lateral ankle hardware that also healed uneventfully. The patient who developed the delayed union was started on a bone stimulator before its identification because of his comorbidities (patient 15), and the fracture went on to heal without complication. The valgus malunion occurred in a patient with bilateral pilon fractures and was a type C3 fracture with fracture blisters (patient 7). The patients followed up with their respective surgeons an average of 8.8 months (range, 6-21 months). At the time of follow-up, 4 patients had removal of prominent symptomatic hardware at an average of 14.6 months after definitive treatment. Patients were followed up for at least 6 months to evaluate for soft tissue complications, similar to McFerran et al ( With surgical treatment of tibial plafond fractures, minimizing the soft tissue damage is vital to prevent potentially catastrophic complications ( Although “closed” reduction techniques such as percutaneous and external fixation would be least traumatizing to the tissue, inadequate anatomic joint reduction can be a complication, particularly in the more complicated pilon fracture patterns ( Recognition of the morbidity associated with both the soft tissue and osseous complications has influenced surgeons to use alternative techniques for exposure and definitive stabilization ( Most commonly, a biplanar delta frame was used with 2 pins in the tibia and 2 pins in the foot. In some instances, a transcalcaneal pin was the sole form of fixation distal to the fracture site. Although this provided some stabilization, it was usually inadequate to completely immobilize the foot on the leg and fracture. We also tried to avoid the neck of the talus as an insertion point for one of the distal fixator pins, particularly later in our series. Although it was rare for the incisional approach to extend distally enough to communicate with the neck of the talus, potential contamination of the surgical site was a concern. The optimal insertion point for the second pin was either the navicular, medial cuneiform, or first metatarsal. Not all of our patients were stabilized with external fixation as the initial surgical maneuver. In some instances, patients were triaged in another hospital, placed in a cast or splint, and sent to us for definitive care. In other cases, the fracture was deemed to have acceptable alignment. Although external fixation provides better stability than simple cast or splint immobilization, we did not feel it necessary to place all of those patients who were encountered initially in a fixator arbitrarily, particularly those with lower-energy injuries and minimal displacement. Timing of surgery has been recommended either immediately after the injury ( The vascular supply to the distal tibia can influence the ultimate healing process of the fracture ( The long-term outcome of the patients in our series was not evaluated. Posttraumatic arthrosis will likely be observed in some of our patients in the future, particularly in the high-energy fractures. However, in addition to minimizing soft tissue complications, we sought to achieve a stable, well-aligned articular-metaphyseal fragment so that salvage operations required in the future would be simplified. On the other hand, we believe that we achieved anatomic articular congruity in the lower-energy injuries through careful incision planning, arthroscopic assistance, and considerable experience in these injuries. Several authors have recommended operative stabilization of the fibula at the same time as fixator placement or as an isolated initial operation. The premise is that it adds lateral stability and provides a “starting” point for reconstruction ( A series of 19 pilon fractures treated with a limited incision and percutaneous medial plate fixation has been presented. A 1- or 2-staged protocol was used. There were no major complications and 4 minor complications to the soft tissue envelope. This treatment scheme compares favorably with the more extensile exposures used for operative reduction of the distal tibia.