The effect of surfactants on the treatment of chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) wastewater by electro-coagulation-flotation (ECF) process was studied. Two surfactants, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) were employed in this study to compare the effect of cationic (CTAB) and anodic (SDS) surfactants on ECF. The cationic surfactant can enhance the removal of the turbidity, but anodic surfactant cannot. It can be explained by the hetero-coagulation theory. Moreover, the addition of CTAB in CMP wastewater can reduce the sludge volume and the flotation/sedimentation time in ECF process. The residual turbidity and dissolved silicon dropped with the increase of charge loading. No CTAB pollution problem exists after the ECF process.concentration of CTAB (kg Faraday constant ( current (A) cells number ( atmosphere pressure (N charge loading (C ideal gas constant ( concentration of dissolved Si (kg reaction time (s) temperature (K) volume of the solution (m volume of the hydrogen gas (m volume of the sludge (m valence Chemical mechanical polishing (CMP) process is a conventionally adopted planarization technology in fabricating microchips for integrated circuit (IC) manufacturing Electrochemical (EC) is a novel technique for treating wastewater Tiny particles and other pollutants in CMP wastewater can be coagulated by Al(III) ions produced from anodes and then removed by flotation with hydrogen gas generated from cathodes. The flotation duration is markedly shorter than that of sedimentation following coagulation. Less land thus is required for the treatment plant. However, the particles cannot be completely removed by flotation in a conventional electro-coagulation-flotation (ECF) process because the solid loading of the wastewater is high and the collective efficiency of hydrogen gas is low. Most of the hydrogen bubbles generated from the cathode combine and then are lost to the air due to the hydrophobic nature of hydrogen gas. Surfactants have been used to reduce bubble size and increase collective efficiency in the dispersed air flotation (DiAF) and dissolved air flotation (DAF) processes for a long time The retention time required for treating CMP wastewater by ECF can be dramatically reduced if adding surfactant enhances the performance of flotation of ECF. Therefore, two surfactants, cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS), were employed to examine the influence of cationic and anionic surfactants on treating CMP wastewater by ECF process, respectively. After determining a suitable surfactant, the effects of the surfactant concentration and charge loading applied in the ECF process were investigated to optimize the operating parameters for treating the CMP wastewater. Experiments were conducted in a bipolar batch reactor with seven aluminum electrodes connected in parallel, as in the previous work by the same authors Wastewater was sampled from a semiconductor manufacturer in south Taiwan. A measured amount of CTAB or SDS stock solution was added to the wastewater as a collector and frother. A suitable quantity of NaCl (50 The sludge sedimentation/flotation tests were conducted by a Pyrex glass column of 45    Sludge production is a serious problem for coagulation processes involving aluminum ions. Sludge may comprise over 20% of the solution volume in the EC process  These phenomena can result from the hydrophobic nature of hydrogen gas. As mentioned earlier, most of the hydrogen bubbles generated from the cathode in the solution without CTAB are combined and then lost to the atmosphere. However, owing to the electric repulsion between bubbles caused by the positive charged CTAB molecule adsorbed on the surface of the bubbles, the hydrogen bubbles in the system containing CTAB failed to combine. So most bubbles did not lose to the atmosphere and can aggregate with the flocs. Moreover, finer bubbles have larger surface area. Consequently, all the floc in the system containing CTAB can be removed by flotation. According to above results, it can be concluded that the surfactant enhances the performance of ECF through two phenomena. First, although no direct evidence is provided regarding bubbles size, it is possible that finer bubbles and larger surface area resulting from CTAB addition, along with inhibiting recombination of hydrogen gas, that contribute to enhanced flotation efficiency and kinetics. Second, adding the surfactant with opposite charge of the particle increases the attachment force between the bubble and particle and makes the particles hydrophobic. Therefore, the CTAB was employed not only as a frother, but also as a collector in the ECF process. The charge loading applied ( The dissolved Si can be removed by co-precipitation reaction of Al(III) ions. Co-precipitation occurs upon mixing of aluminum hydroxide and silicic acid (Eq. Surfactant is also a pollutant in industrial wastewater. Therefore, residual CTAB concentration is considered in this study. Surfactant is a source of TOC. Since very little TOC existed in the original wastewater, as shown in  ECF process with the addition of CTAB can effectively treat the CMP wastewater. The CTAB was employed not only as a frother but also as a collector in the process. The concentration of CTAB required to achieve idea flotation performance was below 20 The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of the Chinese Taiwan for financially supporting this research under Contract No. NSC 92-2211-E-002-028.