Gold extraction from aqueous solutions has been performed by micellar enhanced ultrafiltration (MEUF), using SDS and DTAC micelles. DTAC entraps 92–100% of the metal, which is present in form of AuCl4
                     −, owing to electrostatic interaction. Using SDS the extraction of gold is unsuccessful. However, addition of PADA, as a metal extractor agent, according to the ligand modified micellar enhanced ultrafiltration (LM-MEUF) procedure, makes the extraction yield to approach 100% also with SDS. The recovery of gold entrapped in the micellar pseudo-phase has also been investigated. Different stripping agents have been used, the most efficient of them being a mixture of NaCl and NH3 which allowed the metal to be expelled from the micelle with a yield of 85%. Finally, Au(III)/Cu(II) separation is achieved with DTAC or SDS between pH 3 and 5. Almost 100% of Au(III) is retained on DTAC micelles while all Cu(II) remains in the aqueous medium, while the opposite occurs in SDS.The gold demand for electronic, catalytic and biological applications has recently experienced a rapid increase because of gold’s unique physical and chemical properties Gold recovery from industrial waste is performed by pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, bio-hydrometallurgy techniques In this paper we present the results of the extraction and recovery of gold using MEUF and LM-MEUF. The Au(III) complexing agent PADA has been used in LM-MEUF. A method for the Au(III)/Cu(II) separation is presented as well. Tetra chloroauric acid (HAuCl The pH of the solution was measured with a combined glass microelectrode connected to a Metrohm 713 (Herisau, Switzerland) pH-meter and adjusted to the desired value by small additions of HCl or NaOH. The ultrafiltration studies were carried out in batch stirred cells (Amicon, model 8050), with a capacity of 50 The extraction procedure is the following: the cell is initially loaded with 10 The recovery procedure is as follows: the retentate is mixed with 10 The amounts of the metal ion extracted and recovered were determined by the atomic absorption (AA) technique using a PerkinElmer AAnalyst100 system and the samples were atomized in an air/acetylene flame; in the case of low concentrations of gold or copper a HGA-800 graphite furnace was employed. Hollow cathode lamps, specific for gold or copper were used. Calibration curves were performed using standard solutions (Sigma). The repeatability of concentration measurements was within The optical absorption measurements have been performed using a Perkin–Elmer Lambda 35 spectrophotometer with temperature control. Note that Au(III) absorbs in the UV Solutions of gold in form of tetrachloroaurate, AuCl Some MEUF experiments have been performed in order to evaluate the eventual binding of gold to SDS despite the lack of affinity of AuCl The behavior is completely changed on adding the metal extractor PADA to the solutions of AuCl PADA behaves as a diprotic acid ( PADA reacts with Au(III) giving a chelated species Gold extraction has been performed using positively charged micelles of DTAC. The yield of metal retention for different surfactant concentrations in the absence and in the presence of 0.1  The above procedure was applied to extract Cu(II) from water using DTAC and SDS. Copper extraction from CuCl Copper is the metal that most frequently is found in alloy with gold. The results shown above on the extraction of the single metals indicate that the separation of gold and copper from a mixture could be achieved. Two procedures for the separation of the components of Au/Cu mixtures are presented in this section. First, the MEUF process has been applied to a mixture of AuCl The process of component separation in the AuCl The above described procedure shows that gold and copper can be separated by MEUF with excellent yields using either SDS or DTAC, the latter showing the best results under conditions of copper excess. Further experiments have been performed in order to find a convenient method allowing the recovery of the gold adsorbed on the micellar phase. A suitable stripping agent was added to the retentate and the resulting solution was subject to ultrafiltration. Different stripping agents have been tested, such as salts or acid which reduce the surface potential of the micelles, and NH The results are reported in  An attempt has been made to recover gold from the system SDS-Au-PADA by adding to the retentate different concentrations of NaCl, HCl and NH The extraction of Au(III) using the MEUF procedure in the presence of DTAC provides excellent yields and, under particular conditions, good recovery yields. It should be noted that addition of salts and even of strong acid is not sufficient to strip the gold out of the micelle surface. On the other hand, addition of ammonia, as a stripping agent, does not improve recovery of the metal from DTAC. The best results have been obtained using a mixture of ammonia and sodium chloride, where the decrease of the surface potential induced by the salt and the complexing power of ammonia act in the same direction. The LM-MEUF procedure with SDS, yields excellent gold extraction thanks to the hydrophobic properties of PADA but the subsequent recovery process provides, in contrast, poor yields. An interpretation of this behavior could reside on the fact that the Au-PADA complex is too strongly adsorbed on the SDS surface owing to the combined action of hydrophobic forces and charge that act both in the direction of increasing the retention of the Au-PADA complex on the micelle. The excellent yields of Au(III)/Cu(II) separation achieved both with DTAC and SDS could open favorable perspectives in the extraction of precious metals from mixtures using simple MEUF. The financial support by Obra Social “la Caixa”, project OSLC-2012-007, and by the Ministerio de Economia y Competividad—Gobierno de España, project MINECO CTQ2014-58812-C2-2-R, are gratefully acknowledged.