Two membrane bioreactors with different mixed liquor suspended solid concentrations and a hybrid moving bed biofilm reactor-membrane bioreactor which contained carriers only in the aerobic zone of the bioreactor were used in parallel with the same municipal wastewater and compared. The hydraulic retention time was 18h. Kinetic parameters for heterotrophic, autotrophic and nitrite-oxidizing bacteria were evaluated and related to organic matter and nitrogen removals. Three different advanced oxidation process technologies, i.e., H2O2/UV, Fe2+/H2O2/UV and TiO2/H2O2/UV systems, at two H2O2 concentrations of 1gL−1 and 2gL−1, were used to treat the effluents of each biological treatment in batch and were assessed regarding the kinetic performance. The hybrid moving bed biofilm reactor-membrane bioreactor had the best kinetic behavior for the heterotrophic and autotrophic biomass, with a value of TN removal of 72.39±7.57%. The maximum rate of total organic carbon degradation (η
                     max,TOC) was higher in the TiO2/H2O2/UV system for a constant H2O2 concentration, and was independent of the effluent. The Fe2+/H2O2/UV process was more suitable for the effluent from the hybrid MBBR-MBR since η
                     max,TOC was higher at the two H2O2 concentrations used, i.e., 83.07% and 81.54% at 1gL−1 and 2gL−1, respectively.Advanced technologies regarding wastewater treatment are necessary to preserve water quality and to satisfy the current discharge limits imposed on the effluents from municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) by the Water Framework Directive In this sense, a combination of a biological process and chemical oxidation method is usually required for an effective treatment In this study, a hybrid technology between a moving bed biofilm reactor (MBBR) and a membrane bioreactor (MBR) called hybrid moving bed biofilm reactor-membrane bioreactor (hybrid MBBR-MBR) system, which combines suspended and attached biomass, was analyzed together with two membrane bioreactors (MBRs). The hybrid MBBR-MBR is based on the addition of carriers inside the bioreactor for biofilm growth The original wastewater contained a considerable amount of biodegradable compounds, so a pre-oxidation step would only cause unnecessary consumption of chemicals. Thus, the biological treatment (removing biodegradable compounds) was followed by an AOP (oxidizing the organic compounds which are resistant to biological treatment) Unfortunately, if applied as the only treatment, AOPs would render the treatment process economically expensive, as they usually imply a high demand of energy (radiation, ozone, etc.) and chemical reagents (catalysts and oxidizers) Three different AOP technologies were evaluated and compared after the biological process in this research: an H The aim of this research was to determine the kinetic parameters relating to the heterotrophic, autotrophic and nitrite-oxidizing bacteria in two MBR systems and a hybrid MBBR-MBR process and to relate them to the removal of organic matter and nitrogen, respectively, with a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 18 Three pilot WWTPs were fed by a feeding peristaltic pump (323S, Watson-Marlow Pumps Group, USA) with municipal wastewater from a sewage storage tank. The WWTPs worked in parallel and real wastewater came from the outlet of the primary settler of a WWTP in Granada, Spain. The WWTPs consisted of two MBRs, MBR The only differences between MBR Municipal wastewater was pumped into the first aerobic chamber of the bioreactor from the sewage storage tank. It went through the anoxic zone and then it reached the second and third aerobic compartments through a communicating vessel system. The anoxic zone was in the second compartment to avoid recycling from the membrane tank, which contained a higher dissolved oxygen concentration to prevent membrane fouling; this could change the anoxic conditions. Therefore, the anoxic zone was set between the first and the third aerobic chambers with dissolved oxygen concentrations which could be adjusted to values that were not too high. Subsequently, the outlet of the bioreactor was led into a membrane tank which was designed to be an external submerged unit. It was cylindrical, had a diameter of 10 A specific volume of the retentate was removed from the membrane tank as waste sludge. Recycling was carried out from the membrane tank to pump out the aerobic mixed liquor into the first aerobic chamber through a recycling peristaltic pump (323S, Watson-Marlow Pumps Group, USA); then, the anoxic chamber received the mixed liquor. This allowed for maintaining the working MLSS concentration inside the bioreactor and facilitated nitrogen removal. This system combined an MBBR with an MBR ( All anoxic zones had variable speed stirrers (Multi Mixer MM-1000, Biosan Laboratories, Inc., USA) which kept the biofilm media moving in the hybrid MBBR-MBR. The sewage storage tank also had a variable speed propeller (identical to the previous ones) to homogenize the municipal wastewater. The normal propeller speed was 320 Three different AOP technologies were evaluated after each of the biological treatments (MBR Samples were collected every day from the influent, the three effluents and the anoxic and aerobic zones of the bioreactors and the membrane tanks. The operation conditions of the biological treatment of the three pilot WWTPs are shown in A multifunctional meter (PCE-PHD 1, PCE Ibérica, SL, Spain) was used to measure the conductivity, pH and temperature in the influent, effluents and the anoxic and aerobic zones of each bioreactor and the dissolved oxygen concentration in each chamber of the different bioreactors every workday. The chemical oxidation reactor was filled with the effluent of each biological treatment and the different H COD, five-day biochemical oxygen demand (BOD The results obtained throughout this study were analyzed using a computer-assisted statistical program called SPSS 20.0 for Windows. Tukey's HSD post-hoc procedure was used to determine statistically significant differences between the results for COD, BOD Respirometric experiments were performed weekly to analyze the influence of the different conditions on the behavior of the biomass present in the reactor of the biological treatment. These studies allowed the estimation of the maximum specific growth rate ( The kinetic model of pseudofirst-order of the organic removal was used to adjust the kinetics of the different AOP technologies used according to Calero et al.  Mixed liquor volatile suspended solids (MLVSS) and volatile biofilm density (VBD) were used for the estimation of kinetic parameters. The MBR  The organic matter removal was very similar in the studied WWTPs, as can be observed in The MBR The concentrations of TN and TP in the influent and the effluents and the reduction percentages of TN and TP in the three WWTPs are indicated in Dong et al. The removal percentages of TP were low in the WWTPs as there was not a strict anaerobic zone to initialize the process of biological phosphorus removal The bioreactors in MBR   The corresponding values of the kinetic parameters of this model are shown in The following conclusions were drawn: The hybrid MBBR-MBR showed the best kinetic performance from the point of view of heterotrophic and autotrophic biomass. It supported the efficiency of TN removal with a value of 72.39 The Among the different alternatives studied, the combined process of hybrid MBBR-MBR with TiO This work was executed in the framework of the Tecoagua Project managed by Abengoa Water. The research was supported by the