As oxidants under alkaline conditions. To analyze the kinetics of leaching, tests were performed using electrical contacts pins and sheets of pure gold to avoid the effects of pore diffusion. The efficiency of each oxidant was evaluated, for concentrations of 0.004, 0.01 and 0.03 M, at pH values of 9.4 and 11. At the end of each test, the solid residue was analyzed to determine the total grade and percentage of metal extraction. The experimental results indicated that the percentage of gold extraction was affected by the oxidant concentration and the pH. Furthermore, it improves with the presence of Cu2+ ions, increasing by 100% for glycine and approximately 6 fold for glutamate as compared to glycine solutions. In assessing the percentage of gold extraction in the different conditions at 25 and 40 °C, it was observed that the kinetics of extraction is sensitive to temperature change, which suggests that the leach is chemically controlled.The extraction of gold from its minerals is achieved through hydrometallurgical processes, where the traditional process of cyanidation has dominated. Since the beginning of the 20th Century, the acceptance of cyanidation by gold producers is a tribute to its effectiveness ( The main disadvantage of cyanidation is its toxicity. The environmental problems associated with the leakage of cyanide into groundwater systems and the health risks inherent in the use of this on any scale are a strong drawback ( For that reason, there is a clear need to implement clean technologies for the extraction of silver and gold, that increase productivity by avoiding the generation of waste contaminants ( In this study, a method was evaluated for the recovery of gold from computer contact pins and a sheet of pure gold, using alkaline solutions of amino acids such as glycine and monosodium glutamate. The selection of these reagents was based on a review of scientific literature ( This methodology could represent an alternative to cyanide for gold recovery and could diminish the environmental impacts generated by the inadequate handling of the compounds used for gold beneficiation. Therefore, further study is warranted to evaluate the ability of amino acids in general, not only to enhance, but to completely replace cyanide as a ligand for gold extraction. In the present work, two amino acids, glycine and glutamate, were employed. All leaching experiments were carried out using pins from computers and thin gold sheets, to avoid the effects of pore diffusion, common in mineral, and to evaluate gold dissolution with these selected amino acids. The pins are electrical contacts, composed of gold-plated metal alloys. Therefore, these pins, due to its characteristics and its relatively low cost, became the ideal material to assess the conditions in which gold dissolves in aqueous solutions of these organic ligands (amino acids). The results obtained with the pins were compared with two tests performed on samples cut from a pure gold sheet (99.95%, Sigma-Aldrich). The organic ligands (glycine and glutamate) and oxidizing agents (hydrogen peroxide (30% w/v) and potassium permanganate) employed in this work were of analytical grade. For pH adjustment, NaOH was used. The pins were characterized by scanning electron microscopy SEM-EDX (ZEISS EVO MA10), in order to estimate the chemical elements present and their distribution. A sample of these was digested in a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid, later the elemental composition of this solution was determined by using atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Varian SpectrAA 220fs). The pins were subjected to a pre-treatment, which consisted in the placement of 5 g of pins into 200 ml of 1.8 M H Leaching experiments of the residue were performed in aqueous solutions of 0.5 M glycine or glutamate, with potassium permanganate or hydrogen peroxide as oxidizing agents ( In The thermodynamic analysis was performed with the Hydra – Medusa software suite, where the effect of the concentration of oxidizing agent and pH, to determine the potentially adequate conditions and interpretations of the kinetics for gold leaching. The stability constant for the complex gold-glycine complex was given by In  Based on this analysis, the chosen testing conditions were pH 9.4 and 11, which is within the range in which the oxidation reaction could occur with 0.5 M glycine. On the other hand, at lower glycine concentrations, the oxidation is more difficult, as may be observed in However, the most important disadvantage associated with the use of glycine is its great affinity for copper ions. At conditions, similar to those used to leach gold (0.5 M glycine and pH 9.4 and 11), copper is oxidized at potentials approximately 800 mV lower ( The analysis of the pins employed in the leach testing was performed using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), with EDX. The cross-section of the sample showed the existence of three layers in each of the pins: a core composed mainly of Cu and with small amounts of Sn ( The results of the semi-quantification in general reveal variation of the elements in the pins in terms of content and proportions. For example, in the core, the Cu concentrations are at least 97% and the Sn less than 3%, in atomic percentage. The composition of the first coating (which borders the core) varies: 6–41% Fe, 3–17% Ni, 13–34% Cu and 5–71% Al; gold is less than 4%. In the outer-most layer, the atomic percentages of gold are 83–91%, while Cu varies between 4 and 9%, Ni is less than 7% and Al less than 3%. Because the SEM results are non - quantitative and only show point values, they are not adequate to determine the gold composition of the sample. For that reason, Regia digestions were performed on several samples, which were subsequently analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. A sizeable disparity in the gold and copper content is presented in As was mentioned previously, thermodynamic predictions and the results found by Each leaching test employed 39 mg of the residue in 100 ml of the corresponding solution. Listed below are some of the most effective leaching tests, with their respective conditions and results: To study the effect of the oxidizing agent in the leaching of gold in solution of monosodium glutamate, is added hydrogen peroxide (H The results show that oxidizing with hydrogen peroxide is less effective in glutamate solution in comparison with KMnO The effect of the concentration of potassium permanganate on the dissolution of gold in solutions of glycine and glutamate is shown in In the results shown, low concentrations of potassium permanganate were employed in order to avoid reagent degradation. At low concentrations, reaction rates are much lower and a stagnation of the reaction occurs, although it presents a greater stability in the formation of the complex since there is no re-precipitation of gold in solution. This phenomenon of stagnation can be due to the fact that under these conditions of pH and low values of potential the predominant species would be (AuOH) auroso hydroxide and its presence might generate passivation of the gold surface, preventing the reaction with amino acids. In In To study the behavior of the gold in the absence and presence of added copper ions, additional two leaching test were performed using 5 mg of gold samples with 99.95% purity in selected conditions, based on the thermodynamic analysis, the above results and a review of the literature. In  It has been shown that the type of oxidizing agent and its concentration affect gold leaching kinetics. The highest percentage of extraction was achieved with glutamate using 0.03 M potassium permanganate as an oxidant at pH 9.4. The addition of Cu The great affinity between the amino acids and copper negatively affects the process of gold leaching. The present study showed gold leaching with these reagents has very slow kinetics in comparison with that of cyanide, which renders their application inconvenient, as reagents for agitated leach systems in the gold industry. In the glycine‑potassium permanganate system, the kinetics of leaching is strongly affected by the temperature, which indicates that the reaction mechanism is chemically controlled.