In the current study, effect of cocoa powder processing steps comprised of roasting, grinding and alkalization treatment, and in-vitro gastrointestinal digestion on the stability of total phenolics, antioxidant capacity (by ORAC and DPPH assays) and procyanidins was investigated. Roasting and alkalization treatment significantly reduced polyphenols (65% and 87%, respectively) including flavonoids, and antioxidant capacity (21% and 51% for ORAC assay; 42% and 58% for DPPH assay, respectively) (p < 0.05). Nevertheless, grinding after roasting led to an increase in polyphenols for 5 fold, and antioxidant capacity for 1.9 and 1.5 fold for ORAC and DPPH assays, respectively (p < 0.05). To our knowledge, there is no detailed study on the effect of processing on in-vitro gastrointestinal digestion of procyanidins. Particularly, alkalization treatment caused to lower the bioaccessibility levels of procyanidins. Due to higher fat content, procyanidins could be protected in cocoa beans and cocoa liquor samples compared to cocoa powder. Bioaccessibility index of procyanidins, ranging between 68.5% and 69.6% in gastric digestion, between 68.5% and 70.9% in duodenal digestion was not affected by fat content of cocoa sources. In summary, natural cocoa liquor was the best phenolic source among unroasted and roasted cocoa beans, alkalized cocoa liquor and cocoa powder.Cocoa beans ( Polyphenol content of cocoa beans depends on genetic factors and processing conditions such as postharvest handling, fermentation, drying, roasting, grinding, and alkalization treatment ( Although a proportion of phenolics is lost during processing conditions, cocoa powder is still known as a very powerful antioxidant source. In fact, (−)-Epicatechin (EC), (+)-Catechin (C), Epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), Epigallocatechin (EGC), Epicatechin gallate (ECG), Gallocatechin (GC), dimer B2, trimer C1, and Trolox (6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All other chemicals and reagents used for the analyses were of analytical or high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade and obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), unless otherwise specified. A composite procyanidin oligomer standard containing monomers through decamers was purified from cocoa beans as previously described by Forastero variety of raw (fermented and dried) cocoa beans were obtained from Ghana by an industrial cocoa powder and chocolate producer in Istanbul, Turkey. Drying and fermentation were performed in Ghana according to the local practices. Therefore, there is no detailed information related with the conditions of fermentation and drying. Cocoa powder production was carried out by the factory located in Istanbul, Turkey. Cocoa beans were roasted at 150 °C for 60 min. After the alkaline treatment with calcium carbonate (50 g/L) which increases the pH from 5.5 up to 8.2 at between 80 and 100 °C for 12–14 h, cocoa liquor was pressed into cocoa powder. Samples were collected from raw cocoa beans, roasted cocoa beans, natural cocoa liquor, alkalized cocoa liquor and cocoa powder in three batches. A diagram of cocoa powder production is given in The extraction of phenolics was carried out according to the method described by Total phenolic content was measured by Folin-Ciocalteu assay, as described by Determination of total flavonoid content was performed by the method of All samples were suspended in acetone: Milli-Q water: acetic acid (700:295:5, mL:mL:mL) at a ratio of 1:5 g/mL. After vortexing for 5 min and centrifuged at 12,000 Separation of the compounds up to trimers was achieved by a reversed phase ultra fast liquid chromatography (UFLC) (Prominence Liquid Chromatography LC-20AD, Shimadzu) with PDA detector described by Both hydrophilic and lipophilic oxygen radical absorbance capacity assays (H-ORAC and L-ORAC) were carried out on a Synergy™ HT Multi-Detection Microplate Reader (BioTek Instruments, Winooski, VT) at 37 °C, described by For H-ORAC, samples (0.3 g) were extracted with 25 mL of 70:29.5:0.5 (v/v/v) acetone/water/acetic acid by sonication at 30 °C for 10 min For L-ORAC assay, 1 g sample was dissolved in 20 mL acetone. An aliquot of sample solution was diluted with 70 g/L randomly methylated beta-cyclodextrin (RMCD) (Cyclolab R&D Ltd., Budapest, Hungary) solvent in a 500 mL/L acetone-water mixture and was shaken for 1 h at room temperature on an orbital shaker at 400 rpm ( DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl) radical scavenging activity of the samples was determined following the method of The method performed within this study was previously described by All analyses were performed in triplicate. The results were expressed as mean ± standard deviation and statistical significance at Data given in The antioxidant capacity of the samples was determined using two different Antioxidant capacity is strictly correlated to polyphenol content. Similar to total phenolic and total flavonoid content results, natural cocoa liquor had the highest amount of polyphenols. TAC value obtained by ORAC assay followed the order; natural cocoa liquor > unroasted cocoa bean ≈ roasted cocoa bean ≈ alkalized cocoa liquor ≈ cocoa powder (   Quantification of procyanidins by RP-UFLC is given in For both gastric and duedonal digestion, each of C, EC, dimer B2, and trimer C1 was quantified in chyme (soluble) and pellet (non-soluble) fractions. The amounts of procyanidins in the chyme are higher than in the pellet fraction after gastric digestion as previously reported by Bioaccessibility index defines the percentage of procyanidin that is solubilized in the chyme after each step of digestion. This index indicates the quantity of digested phenols that are solubilized into water phase (chyme) and become available for potential absorption in the systematic circulation in biological systems ( Natural cocoa liquor is the best source for obtaining a rich phenolic extract due to their high phenolic content and antioxidant capacity among different cocoa sources. In addition, alkalization treatment not only decreases phenolics and antioxidant capacity, but also affects This study was financially supported by