Some authors have overstated the problem of plastics wastes accumulating in large quantities. The amounts and types of such wastes must be well understood if recovery methods, such as froth flotation, are to be applied successfully. Not all plastics discards are reasonably recoverable and statistics on gross quantities must be analyzed for those that are. The amount of plastic wastes generated can be related to plastics production only with an understanding of the product life spans of different plastics items and which plastics are used for items that will at some time be in the waste stream. Without this knowledge, feedstocks for recovery cannot be intelligently or economically chosen.
                  Selected plastics mixtures have been separated by froth flotation for subsequent recovery of the individual plastics, reviewed here from the perspective of gamma flotation, float–sink based on the plastic surfaces’ values of the Zisman critical surface tension for wetting (γ
                     C). It is shown how float–sink may depend on the values γ
                     C and the liquid surface tension (γ
                     L/G) of the flotation bath. Other investigators have reported flotation depression by the addition of selected water-soluble polymers and attribute the results to adsorption of these polymers on the plastics’ surfaces. Some authors attribute the effects of surfactants similarly to adsorption. This discussion questions these interpretations given the low surface free energy of polymers. The review and discussion is not intended to explain all observations by gamma flotation. It is intended to encourage new paths for additional research.
                  Perhaps in spite of the gaps in understanding, there have been successful froth flotation separations of plastics, including separating a mixture of rigid plastics pieces recovered from municipal solid waste (MSW). Some previously unreported results of such experiments are summarized here.Every few years, it is worthwhile to review and update the sources, amounts, and recovery technologies of specific materials from waste, particularly from municipal solid waste (MSW).  This paper is mostly a review but introduces some new ideas. Also, several cogent old references are cited because they are apt to be overlooked in a machine search of the literature. There are several objectives: (1) to explore briefly the “plastics problem” and place it in perspective; (2) to offer an elaborated approach to froth flotation of plastics; (3) to discuss some of the surface chemistry of froth flotation; and (4) to describe some previously unreported separation results for the froth flotation of mixed plastics derived from municipal solid waste as well as to describe briefly and qualitatively the properties of the separated fractions.   Franklin Associates has published almost annual reports of municipal waste generation and composition in the US for almost 20 years. These reports are considered the authoritative source for such data. Their analyses are based on macro-economic input–output of various raw materials but not always tested against statistical samples of MSW. It is not clear that the input–output analyses for plastics take into account the various useful lifetimes of various plastic articles. Useful life spans for such items have been listed as 1 year for packaging, 5 years for transportation applications, 10 years for furniture, house wares, electrical, and electronic products, and 50 years for building and construction materials ( The Franklin data are the only set of almost internally consistent measures of the quantity of MSW and its composition. The term “almost” is inserted because from time to time Franklin has changed the bases for their analyses. This was done after the first few reports, at least as shown by careful reading.  Many researchers have tried to separate mixtures of plastics by differences in density, sink–float. This approach dates back about 50 years and the references seem long lost. The “plastics problem” resulting from MSW, from the viewpoint of applying froth flotation is limited to discarded rigid packaging, toys, and household or office items. All of this makes up a small portion of the MSW, perhaps from 2 to 4% of the waste by weight, less that fraction of such materials that is not recoverable or misreports in a separation for various reasons. HDPE and PET containers, the most readily recyclable items, constitute maybe two percent of US MSW (Franklin, 1988) and are often separated for recovery prior to collection. Thus, the “problem” is not as great as appears from cursory analyses and froth flotation may better be used for industrial waste streams than for municipal. All this begs the question of how much and what types of plastics may be useful as feed for a froth flotation process. If the plastics are source separated from the remainder of the waste, a question is whether froth flotation can clean say PET from a small amount of PVC contamination and still meet the rigid specification for the PET product of minute content of PVC? Flotation may be capable of separating common plastics by generic type. However, it cannot separate LDPE from HDPE or among types of LDPE and maybe not from polypropylene. The recovered polyolefin materials will have to be used in mixture, which, as described briefly later, is likely possible. On the other hand, if the MSW can be processed to produce a mixed rigid plastics fraction, then froth flotation may be quite useful in separating the complex mixture into useful products. This was done (to an extent) years ago and the brief work is described in a later section. Also, it was the approach used by Although froth flotation is a long-established unit operation in minerals dressing (more than a century), its application to plastics mixtures is not noted in early treatises on waste plastics recovery, such as Early reports of the froth flotation of plastic mixtures were by Related but somewhat different from say the more exhaustive work by The concept of the critical surface tension was first described by Zisman and co-workers, summarized well by him in 1964. The explanation begins with the contact angle, Knowledge of  Other ways of using such wettability data to determine Obviously, This discussion applies to low-energy solids only and refers back to the question raised above whether the critical surface tension for wetting ( The values of Δ  Since the particle is heavier than the liquid, it would sink when placed on the liquid if not sustained by the upward force caused by the surface tension ( The sinking force, in dynes, will be: If The float–sink of small particles in liquids of differing  The purpose of a “depressant” is to cause a particle that would otherwise float, to sink. A usual depressant is a water-soluble polymer, nonionic or a polyelectrolyte. Shen et al. (2002) attempted to enhance the flotation separation of plastics by “conditioning” with methylcellulose. It is suggested here that this is the wrong approach. A conditioning agent is intended to adsorb (or otherwise modify a surface) so as to selectively make a surface more hydrophilic, seeking a zero contact from water thus causing the particle to sink. If methylcellulose is a conditioning agent for any polymer, it must adsorb. An adsorbed depressant will not achieve its purpose if the exposed surface of the adsorbed layer is hydrophobic. This would raise the contact angle and enhance flotation, with or without frothing. Shen et al. (2002) reported results not entirely inconsistent with these statements; they attributed the depression of flotation of some polymers by methylcellulose to adsorption of this conditioning agent. The effect on a group of seven plastics could be divided into three categories of depressed floatability, intermediated floatability, and high floatability. These categories did not correlate with literature values of  The value of A conditioning agent or depressant functions only if it can be adsorbed. For most plastics, especially common plastics, this will be difficult. Whereas it is easy to conceive of a polyelectrolyte adsorbing on say PA6.6, the opposite is true for adsorption on a polyolefin. Commonly, Surfactants are well known to adsorb on some surfaces such as on the hydroxyl-rich cotton surface (   The challenge in the use of surfactants in the froth flotation separation of plastics is to adjust the surface tension of the bath so as to wet one of the plastic components and not another. In some cases this challenge will be exacerbated by small differences in the critical surface tensions of the components, perhaps influenced by surface residues. The challenge is ever more because small mounts of surfactant solute will cause a steep decrease in the surface tension up to about 0.2%, or the critical micelle concentration. After that point, adding more surfactant has little or no effect on the surface tension. Thus, the needed small adjustments in surface tension for some flotation separations may not be possible merely by adjusting surfactant concentration. This work was performed 1976–1977 when the author was at the National Center for Resource Recovery Inc. The results are qualitative and have not been reported before. Municipal solid waste from household sources was processed in a 45 The non-metallic fraction from the eddy current separator was handpicked to remove rigid plastics. Handpicking was used because there was no known device (at least at that time) for mechanically removing the plastics from unrecoverable residues. This plastics fraction consisted of pieces of rigid containers, toys, and miscellaneous items including footwear. The plastics fraction was shredded in a knife shredder to pieces about 0.5–1 The fractions were divided each into several small samples and sent to various plastics companies for evaluation. This was through the courtesy of Mr. Lawrence, then, at the Society of the Plastics Industries (now, the American Plastics Council). The fractions were examined rheologically to determine if there was any commercial interest in any of them, i.e., could they be extruded or molded to salable products? The residue fraction consisted of an almost indescribable mixture. There was at least PVC and rubber, such as from shoe heels. There was no further interest in this fraction. The middling fraction consisted of various styrene products, principally. However, the mixture was so heterogeneous that there was little if any further interest. The float fraction consisted of various polyolefins. There was considerable interest in this fraction. However, the work was not pursued for two principal reasons. One reason was that no mechanical device was known that could separate the mixed plastics from the plastics-rich residue following eddy current separation of the air classifier heavy fraction. For example, successive screening did not accomplish what was necessary. The second reason was that because of the variability of MSW day-to-day and season-to-season, the composition of the polyolefin fraction could not be assured over the course of a year or more, perhaps not even day-to-day. The so-called plastics problem stemming from municipal waste (and probably even industrial wastes) must be better defined in terms of sources, amounts, and composition in order to direct recovery efforts (and certainly to determine economic viability of recovery methods, a subject beyond the scope of this discussion). The better definition is likely to redirect the course of future research on separation methods, especially froth flotation. The research may bear more fruit if directed to plastics mixtures likely to be encountered in particular waste streams. For example, industrial waste streams are likely to be fairly consistent over time. Investigators of the froth flotation separation of plastics mixtures have understandably invoked approaches and explanations from the vast similar literature for minerals processing. This does not give full recognition to the differences in the two feedstocks. Inorganic minerals have high-energy surfaces subject to strong adsorption by solutes and establishment of stabilizing electrical forces for flotation. Plastics have low-energy surfaces, unlikely to adsorb solutes and unlikely to form any kinds of electrical stabilizing forces for flotation. An alternative approach to understanding the froth flotation separation of plastics is gamma flotation, float–sink based on Zisman’s critical surface tension for wetting (  Perhaps in spite of all this, there have been successful plastics separations by froth flotation, such as reported in several of the references cited and in the limited experience reported here using a mixture of rigid plastics pieces recovered from municipal solid waste and separated by the method of There is no intention here to explain every flotation result for plastics mixtures by invoking the critical surface tension for wetting or by denying any adsorption. Rather, the discussion in this paper is to show the consistencies of some of the results with these concepts and to open the path to additional research. The author had the privilege of working with many of the investigators cited in the older references. Drs. Schwartz, Zisman, and Menkart were valued colleagues and friends of many years. Sadly, they are all deceased. Ms. Shafrin, Mr. Berch (also deceased), Mr. Cook, and Mr. Mutchler were valued friends, professional colleagues, and collaborators. Drs. Schwartz and Zisman were close friends and will always be admired and missed.