Natural convection in a two-dimensional square cavity filled with a water–CuO nanofluid is numerically studied. Two pairs of heat source–sink are considered to cover the entire length of the bottom wall of the cavity while the other walls are thermally insulated. The nanofluid is assumed to be homogenous and Newtonian. The governing differential equations are discretised by the control volume approach and the coupling between velocity and pressure is solved using the SIMPLE algorithm. A comparison study is presented between two cases with different arrangements of the two pairs on the bottom wall. The effects of Rayleigh number and solid volume fraction of the nanofluid on the heat transfer rate have also been examined. The results show that regardless of the position of the pairs of source–sink, the heat transfer rate increases with an increase of the Rayleigh number and the solid volume fraction.specific heat, gravitational acceleration, thermal conductivity, length of the cavity, local Nusselt number on the heat source average Nusselt number fluid pressure, modified pressure ( dimensionless pressure ( Prandtl number ( radius of nanoparticles, Rayleigh number ( temperature, K sink temperature, K source temperature, K velocity components in dimensionless velocity components ( Cartesian coordinates, m dimensionless coordinates ( thermal diffusivity, thermal expansion coefficient,1/ solid volume fraction Boltzmann constant, modelling function Eq. dynamic viscosity, kinematic viscosity, dimensionless temperature ( density, maximum stream function minimum stream function modelling function Eq. effective fluid (pure) nanofluid solid nanoparticle The study of natural convection in square cavities has attracted considerable interest amongst researchers due to its increasing engineering applications such as the cooling systems of electronic devices. The advantageous characteristics of natural convection cooling systems are their simplicity, reduced noise, manageable size and minimum cost. A comprehensive review of the studies on natural convection in cavities has been presented by Ostrach It has been shown that the addition of nanoparticles with relatively higher thermal conductivity to the base fluid results in an increase of the thermal performance of the resultant mixture (nanofluid) The study of natural convection in cavities filled with nanofluids has also been reported in the literature  The continuity, momentum and energy equations for the laminar and steady-state natural convection in the two-dimensional cavity can be written in non-dimensional forms as follows: In the above equations, the following non-dimensional parameters are used: The effective density, the thermal diffusivity, the heat capacitance and the thermal expansion coefficient of the nanofluid are given by: In the governing equations, According to This equation is valid for temperatures in the range of 300 The boundary conditions, used to solve Eqs. The local and averaged heat transfer rates of the cavity can be presented by means of the local and averaged Nusselt number. The local Nusselt number (Nu) for each heat source is given by: The average Nusselt number for each heat source is determined by integrating The control volume formulation is used to solve the governing Eqs. The present computation is validated against the results for three cases that are used in the study by Deng A comparison study is presented for two cases of heat transfer in the nanofluid-filled cavity with different arrangements of the two pairs of heat source–sink on the bottom wall of the cavity (  For case 1, For case 2, In order to have a better understanding of the flow behaviour within the cavity, the variation of vertical component of fluid velocity (y-velocity) along the horizontal axis at the mid-section of the cavity is plotted for both pure water and the water–CuO nanofluid (ϕ In order to present a comparison of the heat transfer performance between case 1 and case 2, the values of the local Nusselt number ( The average Nusselt number ( Laminar natural convection in a two-dimensional square cavity filled with a water–CuO nanofluid was numerically studied. The natural convection was generated due to two pairs of heat source–sink located on the bottom wall of the cavity. Two cases with different configurations for the positioning of the heat source–sink pairs on the bottom wall were considered. The main focus of this study was to compare the heat transfer performance of these two cases at different Rayleigh numbers and solid volume fraction of the nanofluid. For both cases, increasing the Rayleigh number resulted in stronger streamlines within the cavity. The nanofluid was associated with stronger circulating cells compared to pure water at high Rayleigh numbers. The rate of heat transfer also increased with an increase of the solid volume fraction of the nanofluid. In general, case 2 was associated with symmetrical distribution of the streamlines and isotherms within the cavity, the y-velocity along the horizontal axis at the mid-section of the cavity and the local Nusselt number along the bottom wall. Higher heat transfer performance was, however, found for case 1 where the buoyant flows are composed together generating a circulating cell that covers the whole cavity.