Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE) and purification of uranium, from crude sodium diuranate (SDU) containing uranium (53%), iron (22.2% of U) and rare earth impurities (4% of U), has been studied. Adduct of tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) and nitric acid (HNO3) has been used for uranium dissolution and extraction. Carbon dioxide has been used as supercritical fluid. For 200mg of crude SDU, operating parameters such as temperature, pressure, quantity of TBP·HNO3 adduct, static and collection time have been optimized at 323K temperature, 15.20MPa pressure, 1mL of TBP·HNO3 adduct, 20min. static time and 20min. collection time. Under these conditions, uranium extraction efficiency was 95±5%. Addition of free nitric acid leads to improvement in purity of uranium. Uranium was stripped from SFE extract and precipitated as ammonium diuranate (ADU), which was then subjected to second cycle of SFE. After two cycles of SFE, purification factor of uranium was found to be 4970, 90, 110 and 60 with respect to iron, yttrium, ytterbium and erbium respectively.Uranium is used worldwide as fuel for nuclear power reactors to produce electricity. The conventional resources of uranium are limited and available in few countries. Uranium recovery from unconventional sources is being explored worldwide for sustainable nuclear power generation. Rock phosphate ore is a valuable unconventional source of uranium which, depending upon its source, contains uranium in the range of 50 to 200 Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE) is a method of separation that employs Supercritical Fluid (SCF) as extraction media. Solubility of a substance, and hence extraction behavior in SCF is dependent on density of SCF which can be tuned by changing pressure and temperature conditions. Also, SCF possesses diffusivity, viscosity and surface tension intermediate to that of liquid and gas. Due to high diffusivity, it can extract materials of interest directly from solid phase. Low viscosity and surface tension leads to faster mass transfer and kinetics ( Uranium oxide has been successfully dissolved with TBP·HNO In present study, feasibility of direct dissolution and SFE of uranium from crude sodium diuranate (SDU) matrix, containing impurities such as iron, transition and rare earth elements, has been explored. TBP·HNO Analytical Reagent (AR) grade TBP and nitric acid have been used in the study. Ultrapure water obtained from Millipore ultrapure water system was used for preparing reagents. Chloroform used for collecting SFE extracts and ammonium hydroxide used for uranium precipitation were of AR grade (Merck make). Calibration standards used during analysis by Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrophotometer (ICP-OES) were prepared from single elemental standard solution (Inorganic Ventures, Virginia, USA). Schematic diagram of the SFE set up is shown in Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectrophotometer (ICP-OES) of Horiba Jobin make (Ultima 2) has been used for analysis of uranium and other impurities. The instrument consists of RF Generator (40.68 TBP·HNO Dried SDU (200 Amount of uranium present in SDU was determined by ICP-OES after its dissolution in 4 In solvent extraction, extent of separation among different elements is measured by a term defined as separation factor which is defined as ratio of distribution ratio of two elements. Since supercritical fluid extraction is a non-equilibrium process which depends on distribution ratio as well as kinetics and mass transfer of extraction. Hence, definition of separation factor has been modified [Eq. Extent of purification of uranium from its impurities has been expressed as purification factor (P.F.) which has been calculated as below I I Uranium was stripped from SFE extract with dilute HNO ADU obtained above ( TBP·HNO Dissolution of SDU and formation of uranyl nitrate. Complexation of uranyl nitrate with TBP The overall extraction process ( Where, K The phase distribution constants of TBP, K And formation constant of U-TBP complex in the acid solution, K Eq. From Eqs. By taking log on both sides, K The distribution ratio D Eqs. By taking log on both sides and substituting the values of K Chrastil ( Here The phase distribution constant, K Where S Which on expansion gives Where On substituting the value of log S from Eq. Extraction efficiency of U-TBP complex into SC CO Effect of pressure on extraction efficiency has been studied at 333 Studies have been carried out to understand the effect of temperature on extraction efficiency of uranium from 200 The SFE system was kept at equilibrium after attaining desired temperature and pressure for certain time period to complete dissolution and complexation of uranium with TBP·HNO Collection time is the time period during which CO Effect of variation of molarity of HNO TBP·HNO This may be the cause of decrease in extraction efficiency after 2 The optimized parameters for SFE of uranium from SDU are tabulated in Effect of quantity of SDU on extraction efficiency of uranium and its purification from rare earth elements has been studied at 333 Extraction efficiency is not affected much from 200 In ADU (~ Direct dissolution and SFE of uranium from crude SDU is feasible. For 200 Authors express their sincere gratitude to Director, RC&IG, BARC and Chief Executive, HWB for their persistent support. We are also thankful to Associate Director (SET), HWB for his support and encouragement during this work.