Vanadium oxides nanorods with high crystallinity and high surface area were synthesized by hydrothermal method using laurylamine hydrochloride, metal alkoxide and acetylacetone. The samples characterized by XRD, nitrogen adsorption isotherm, SEM, TEM, and SAED. Uniformly sized B phase VO2 nanorods had widths about 40–80nm and lengths reaching up to 1μm. V2O5 rodlike structured with the widths about 100–500nm and the lengths of 1–10μm were obtained by calcination at 400°C for 4h. This synthesis method provides a new simple route to fabricate one-dimensional nanostructured metal oxides under mild conditions.The synthesis and characterization of one-dimensional (1-D) nanostructured (nanotubes, nanowires, and nanorods) have received considerable attention due to their unique properties and novel application In this study, the surfactant-assisted process has been expanded to prepare nanostructured vadadium oxides by hydrothermal method. The characteristic of the prepared nanopowders will be reported. Nanostructured vanadium oxides were synthesized using laurylamine hydrochloride (LAHC)/metal alkoxide modified with acetylacetone (ACA). Vanadium triethoxide oxide (VTO, Hokko Chemical Industry Co., Ltd.) was mixed with the same mole of ACA (Nacalai Tesque, Inc.) to slowdown the hydrolysis and condensation reactions The crystalline structure of samples was evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU RINT 2100). The microstructure of the prepared materials was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL JSM-6500FE), transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL JEM-200CX), and selected-area electron diffraction (SAED). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area was determined by the nitrogen adsorption (BEL Japan, BELSORP-18 Plus). Thermal analytical measurements were carried out on a thermongravimetric analyzer (Perkin Elmer, Pyris 1 TGA). Infrared spectra were obtained with Fourier Transfer Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR, Perkin Elmer. Spectrum One) using KBr technique.  The SEM image ( The widths of rods decreased between 40 and 80 In order to confirm the essential of LAHC for the nanorods formation, lower molar ratio of VTO to LAHC and other amine surfactant have been used. In the condition of [VTO]/[LAHC]=1, nano-micro plate-like structured vanadium oxide was obtained ( The mechanism of this vanadium oxides nanorods synthesis is not very clear yet. Nevertheless, organic molecules such as surfactants act as surface ligands and have the ability to control the shape and size of the growing particles, as was shown recently by Banfield et al. As shown in The XRD patterns (  Nano-micro rodlike structured were obtained from the sample (without ACA) calcined at 400 Tungsten oxides and magnesium oxides nanowires were also synthesized using the same route of vanadium oxides nanorods by changing alkoxide precursors. Further study is in progress. In summary, the operation of this synthesis method is a simple hydrothermal method and all the reactions of the synthetic process are carried out in aqueous solution under mild conditions. The hydrothermal process using surfactant enabled to fabricate vanadium oxides nanorods with controlled finer diameter. The rodlike structure in this study had high crystallinity with the widths 50–500 The authors would like to express gratitude to Prof. S. Isoda and Prof. H. Kurata, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of TEM apparatus Prof. T. Yoko, Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University for the use of XRD equipment, Dr. Nakorn Worasuwannarak and Mr. Taro Sonobe, JGSEE, King Mongkut's University of Technology Thonburi for TGA and FTIR experiment. Metal alkoxides were kindly supplied by Hokko Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. This work was supported by a grant-in-aid from the Ministry of Education, Science Sports, and Culture of Japan under the 21 COE program and the Nanotechnology Support Project.