The calcination process is a direct and clean process for upgrading of phosphate ores with high-carbonate contents. In this study, calcination experiments of calcareous phosphate were conducted. Different size fractions were used to evaluate their performance while heating in a static-bed furnace at different calcination times and temperatures. The results showed that the calcined product of coarse particles gives a higher P2O5%. A phosphate concentrate with a grade as high as 34% P2O5 was obtained. Although the larger particle size is higher in grade, the finer particles showed a higher conversion. This behavior was correlated to the change in bed-structure in terms of the particle porosity, surface area and bed permeability due to exposure to high temperatures. The fast fall in both particle porosity and bed permeability in the case of fine particles leads to the capturing of the generated CO2, as a calcination product, inside the individual particle or the entire bed till this gas forms an appreciable pressure gradient that finds its way through the cracks that appear only in fine particle bed.Calcareous phosphate ores represent one of the difficult ores to be treated with the conventional physical separation methods and flotation Hence, calcination was found to be a proper method for upgrading calcareous phosphate ores Although the calcination process is an energy intensive process and has high capital cost, it has several advantages. Among these advantages the lower handling and transportation costs due to its reduced tonnages, lower sulfuric acid consumption, reducing or eliminating the foaming in subsequent chemical processing and the production of special and high-purity and high-priced products. In addition, the reactivity of the calcined product can be maintained by controlling the calcination temperature On the other hand, Al-Jalamid area, in the north of Saudi Arabia, represents one of the huge calcareous phosphate deposits with a reserve estimation that exceeds 1000 A representative sample from Al-Jalamid calcareous phosphate rock, Saudi Arabia, was used in this study. The sample was subjected to primary and secondary crushing leading to a product of 100% — 3.36 Chemical analysis of phosphate samples was conducted using “Perkin-Elmer” Atomic Absorption model “Analyst-200”. Phosphorous was determined by spectrophotometric method using “Perkin-Elmer, model Lambda 3B” Spectrophotometer. X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were carried out with CuKα radiation generated at 20 A series of experiments were carried on the ore covering the temperature range (300–1100 The heating rate of 20 Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) of the original samples were carried out using a TA Instruments Netzsch STA-409EP apparatus. 1.0 The specific surface area of the Al-Jalamid rock samples was determined using nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms that were measured using a Micromeritics-TriStar II instrument. The data were collected at − The surface characteristics of the phosphate ore samples before and after the calcination process were identified using scanning electron microscopy (SEM-JEOL 840). In addition, SEM–EDX technique was used to identify the chemical composition of the products. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the phosphate sample is shown in   It is clear that the particles behave differently according to their sizes. Smallest particles reach their highest grade faster than the coarser ones. Small particles reach their maximum grade after 30 In addition, On the other hand, the noticed difference in the behavior of coarse and small particles can be explained in terms of particle porosity, surface area and bed permeability. These significant parameters affect and control the calcination process especially in static-bed calciners. Therefore, the specific surface area was measured as a function of temperature.  The reduction in the surface area at a temperature lower than the expected calcination temperature, i.e., 900–1000 The particle size and bed-permeability are inter-correlated. In other words, the bed permeability (i.e., voids between bed-forming particles) depends on the particle size. The larger the particle size, the larger the voids are. If the arrangement possibility of the particles is one of the arrangements shown in If the particles were arranged as shown in While the particles follow the arrangement in In both cases the V α d For that reason, it is expected that the fine particles have a very low bed-permeability in comparison to the larger particle sizes. Therefore, it is also expected that the fine particles did not fully reacted unless either a controlled calcination conditions in terms of temperature and time were allowed (see For carbonate minerals, the relation between the calcination rate and the calcination temperature depends mainly on the generated CO On the other hand, This phenomenon is not only for the bed consists of individual particles but also for the large particles that can be simulated as a collection of small particles with different grain boundaries. By further magnification of one of the calcined particles (shown in Calcination of the Al-Jalamid calcareous phosphate ore was conducted in terms of calcination temperature, time and particle size. The particle size plays an important role in heat and mass transfer. It was found that the optimum calcination temperature for the AI-Jalamid rock is around 850 The results showed a significant reduction in the specific surface area of the calcined rock which is ascribed to the sintering of the calcined particles especially the finer ones. In addition, the calcination experiments as well as SEM–EDX results highlighted the effect of bed permeability on the grade of the calcined calcareous phosphate product. The effect of bed permeability is more significant in the case of fine size fractions than the coarser ones due to the higher and faster sinterability of the finer sizes which leads to the capturing of the CO The authors acknowledge the support of King Saud University and Phosphate and Mineral Processing Chair for conducting this research work.