Nanocrystalline mesoporous TiO2 was synthesized by hydrothermal method using titanium butoxide as starting material. XRD, SEM, and TEM analyses revealed that the synthesized TiO2 had anatase structure with crystalline size of about 8nm. Moreover, the synthesized titania possessed a narrow pore size distribution with average pore diameter and high specific surface area of 215m2/g. The photocatalytic activity of synthesized TiO2 was evaluated with photocatalytic H2 production from water-splitting reaction. The photocatalytic activity of synthesized TiO2 treated with appropriate calcination temperature was considerably higher than that of commercial TiO2 (Ishihara ST-01). The utilization of mesoporous TiO2 photocatalyst with high crystallinity of anatase phase promoted great H2 production. Furthermore, the reaction temperature significantly influences the water-splitting reaction.The photocatalytic decomposition of water into H Among various oxide semiconductors, TiO Recently, several papers have shown that TiO In this study, hydrothermal method was reported as a potential method for mesoporous TiO Nanocrystalline mesoporous TiO Simultaneous thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis (TG–DTA; Shimazu DTG-50) was used to study the thermal decomposition behavior of the as-synthesized (dried) photocatalyst. The crystalline structure of samples was evaluated by X-ray diffractometer (XRD; RIGAKU RINT 2100). The microstructure of the prepared materials was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JEOL JSM-6500FE) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEOL JEM-200CX). The nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms and BET specific surface area ( The average crystal sizes were estimated from the line broadening of X-ray diffraction reflections using the Sherrer formula Photocatalytic H The TG–DTA curves of the as-synthesized TiO  The XRD patterns of the samples calcined from 400 to 550 The N The experimental results on BET surface area, mean pore diameter, and total pore volume of all synthesized materials are summarized in  The photocatalytic H  The amount of gaseous H The dependence of the calcination temperature on the amount of H It can be clearly seen that smaller surface area was achieved, whereas higher crystallinity was conversely observed with increasing calcination temperature. By taking this into account, the expected increment of the photocatalytic activity owing to the increase in crystallinity (less number of lattice defects) may exceed the expected decrement of the photocatalytic activity owing to the decrease in the surface area. Therefore, the balance of these two conflicting factors that affect photocatalytic activity is very important for photocatalytic H In the second part, when the synthesized TiO In case of mesoporous TiO The dependence of reaction temperature on the amount of H High surface area nanocrystalline mesoporous TiO This work was financially supported by the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports, and Culture, Japan, under the 21COE program. Gratefulness is forwarded to Prof. S. Isoda and Prof. H. Kurata at the Institute for Chemical Research, Kyoto University, for their support of TEM apparatus. The authors show great appreciation to S. Katao and A. Kitiyanan, Graduate School of Materials Science, NARA Institute of Science and Technology, for his XRD measurement assistance. T. Sreethawong is acknowledged for his help on setup of the apparatus. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 