The use of organic wastes as amendments in heavy metal-polluted soils is an ecological integrated option for their recycling. The potential use of alperujo (solid olive-mill waste) compost and pig slurry in phytoremediation strategies has been studied, evaluating their short-term effects on soil health. An aerobic incubation experiment was carried out using an acid mine spoil based soil and a low OM soil from the mining area of La Unión (Murcia, Spain). Arsenic and heavy metal solubility in amended and non-amended soils, and microbial parameters were evaluated and related to a phytotoxicity test. The organic amendments provoked an enlargement of the microbial community (compost increased biomass-C from non detected values to 35μgg−1 in the mine spoil soil, and doubled control values in the low OM soil) and an intensification of its activity (including a twofold increase in nitrification), and significantly enhanced seed germination (increased cress germination by 25% in the mine spoil soil). Organic amendments increased Zn and Pb EDTA-extractable concentrations, and raised As solubility due to the influence of factors such as pH changes, phosphate concentration, and the nature of the organic matter of the amendments. Compost, thanks to the greater persistence of its organic matter in soil, could be recommended for its use in (phyto)stabilisation strategies. However, pig slurry boosted inorganic N content and did not significantly enhance As extractability in soil, so its use could be specifically recommended in As polluted soils.One of the objectives of soil remediation is the restoration of soil health, i.e. its capacity to carry out its potential ecological functions ( The “Sierra Minera” of La Unión (Murcia, Spain) is a mining area exploited since ancient times to end of the 20th century for extraction of Ag, Pb and Zn. The intense activity transformed the area and gave rise to highly contaminated soils that may pose an important environmental risk to the surrounding zones ( In Spain, olive industry and pig farming are two of the agro-industrial sectors with greatest problems of waste management. The main residue of the first sector is alperujo (solid olive-mill by-product of the two-phase centrifugation method for olive oil extraction), a slightly phytotoxic waste that can be composted in order to obtain a quality organic soil amendment with humified organic matter ( The aim of the present study was to determine the usefulness of alperujo compost and pig slurry as soil amendments in the remediation of mining soils, through the evaluation of their short-term effects on soil health in two soils from the mining area of La Unión (Murcia, Spain). Improving soil health is a preliminary requisite for the establishment of a sustainable vegetation cover that would break source–pathway–receptor linkages in these soils. Aerobic incubations were run with the soils and soils treated with the different amendments. These studies will help in the selection of the most appropriated soil treatment for field application in a phytoremediation strategy. Two metal-contaminated soils from the mining area of La Unión (Murcia, SE Spain) were selected. The first one (LL) was a mine spoil soil with no edaphic development situated by the village of El Llano del Beal (37°37′12.40″N, 0°50′13.51″W) that can be considered as a sterile deposit of mine tailings. The second soil (SG) was a Xeric Petrocalcic ( Two organic amendments with different characteristics and an inorganic liming material were used: compost prepared from “alperujo”, fresh pig slurry, and hydrated lime. The compost was prepared from a mixture of alperujo with fresh cow manure and a mature compost for inoculation (90:9:1% on fresh weight), using the forced ventilation and turning composting system (total composting time including maturation was 9 The pig slurry was collected from a farm situated in Tallante (Cartagena, SE Spain). This material is slightly alkaline, with high EC, low OM content ( An incubation experiment was carried out using four different treatments in soil LL and three in soil SG: unamended soil as control (CT) (250 The dynamics of C-mineralisation was determined in a separate set of incubations, using hermetically closed glass vessels of 500 Seed germination bioassays were performed using soil leachates (1:10 (w/v) water extracts obtained after 24 Soil particle size distribution was assessed using the densimeter method. The pH was determined in saturated soil pastes, in water extracts (1:10 w/v) for compost, and directly for pig slurry. Electrical conductivity (EC) was determined in 1:5 and 1:10 (w/v) aqueous extracts for soils and compost, respectively, and directly for pig slurry. The water-holding capacity was determined gravimetrically, after draining of water-saturated soil. Soil cation exchange capacity (CEC) was determined using the ammonium acetate (pH 7) method ( Trace element total concentrations were determined by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (Unicam 969 AAS, Thermo Elemental) or ICP-OES (Iris Intrepid II XDL, Thermo Scientific) after microwave assisted (Ethos1, Milestone) Metal concentrations in the different fractions were determined by flame AAS. Soil available-As was determined in a 0.5 Using SPSS Version 17.0 software (SPSS Inc.), the data were subjected to ANOVA and differences between means were determined using Tukey’s test. Normality of variances was tested by the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test before determining the ANOVA. In both soils, the concentrations of the heavy metals analysed (Cd, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb and Zn) present in soluble and exchangeable forms (CaCl In soil LL, the addition of compost led to an increase in NaOH-extractable Cu concentrations (associated with organic matter) ( In SG soil, the addition of the organic amendments caused initially a slight increase in Zn NaOH-extractable concentrations (SG-CT: 0.05; SG-CM: 2.22; SG-PS: 3.08 The study of the effects of different soil amendments (including compost) on As solubility, mobility and availability in soils has given rise to controversial results ( Organic amendments have been shown to be useful tools in the recovery of the function and structure of the microbial community in heavy metal-contaminated soils ( Data concerning the evolution of C-mineralisation in soil throughout the incubation were fitted to kinetic models. In soil LL, all treatments followed a combined two first-order kinetic model, indicating the existence of two phases of degradation, a rapid mineralisation phase (degradation of labile compounds) and a slow phase (degradation of more stable compounds) ( The lesser degree of stability of PS was reflected in the higher percentage of mineralisation of the organic-C added with this material with respect to compost treatment at the end of the incubation (% TOC mineralised: PS: 98–74% in LL and SG, respectively; CM: 5.3–5.2% in LL and SG, respectively). Results from compost were within the values found by Due to the contrasting degree of stability of the organic matter of the amendments, the N cycle was differently affected in each organic treatment and in each soil. In soil LL, HL treatment showed similar results to those in the control soil (data not shown). Inhibition of the nitrification processes was observed in PS treatment during the incubation, and In soil SG nitrification was not inhibited, and The differences observed between these soils reflected their distinct physico-chemical conditions, since properties such as pH or level of contamination affect soil microbial populations and their activities, including respiration and nitrification ( In soil LL, In soil SG, only the addition of compost increased In all the treatments, The specific respiration rate or metabolic quotient (qCO Bioassays using vascular plants are considered to be useful tools both to identify the toxicity of the contaminants present in the soil and to evaluate the soil remediation process ( In both soils, compost stimulated Both organic amendments showed as good candidates for their use in phytoremediation strategies of trace element contaminated soils, as their application improved soil properties, increasing soil TOC concentrations at the short-term, intensifying microbial activity (including nitrification and microbial biomass), and improving seed germination related to the nutrients supplied. The major change in the soil distribution of metals (Zn and Pb) was related to the increase of EDTA-extractable concentrations, which indicated the formation of Zn and Pb carbonates. Compost was more effective than pig slurry, due to the greater persistence of its organic matter in soil, so its use in phytostabilisation strategies is more recommended. However, high nutrients content of the slurry (mainly N) could be a positive aspect for vegetal growth, and therefore its use (alone or in combination with compost or other amendments) in these techniques could be considered in futures studies. The main concern of the use of compost and pig slurry as organic amendments in soil remediation is due to the enhancement of As solubility, especially in the calcareous soil where apart from pH, other factors such as phosphate concentration and the nature of the organic matter of the amendments may have influenced As solubility. This work was financially supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (MICINN) through the project CTM2007-66401-C02-01, and by Fundación Séneca (Murcia Region) through the project 11785/PI/09. The authors thank MICINN for the FPI grant awared to Tania Pardo (BES-2008-009480) and The European Social Funds for its financial contribution to the salary of Dr. Clemente (Ramón y Cajal Programme). Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 