A new model is suggested in this study to predict normal and rolling forces acting on CCS type disc cutters by modifying an empirical model developed by Bilgin (1977) for V type disc cutters, which was based on the theoretical model developed by Roxborough and Phillips (1975). The suggested model is based on the fact that V type disc cutters are manufactured with some certain edge radius as a pre-blunting to reduce the premature tool breakages. Giving an edge radius to a sharp V type disc cutter generates a disc tip (edge) profile similar to the edges of CCS type disc cutters. The predictive parameters of the suggested model are disc diameter, edge radius (or half of tip width) as a function of edge angle, cutter penetration and rock uniaxial compressive strength. Results of the full scale linear cutting experiments previously performed by the authors of this study on three different rock samples in relieved (interactive) and unrelieved (uninteractive) cutting modes are used to validate the predictive ability of the suggested model. Some additional experimental data from the recent literature are also used for this purpose. Two different constant cross section (CCS) disc cutters having 330 and 432mm diameters and 12 and 18mm tip widths, respectively, are used in the cutting experiments performed by the authors of this study and different cutter diameters and tip widths are used by the data taken from the literature. The results indicate that the suggested empirical model predicts reliably the normal forces with a slight overestimation, although the rolling force predictions show some scatter. It is also indicated that a theoretical model developed by Rostami and Ozdemir (1993) for CCS type disc cutters predicts normal forces with a very high reliability, although there is some scatter on predictions of the rolling force. Prediction of rolling force should be analyzed in more detail in future studies.Rock cutting mechanics is a science started developing in years 1960s and still progressing. With increasing demand and need of new underground openings, the manufacturers are interested in producing more powerful excavating machines equipped with new technologies and performance prediction of these machines and estimating cutter forces are of primary concerns of practicing engineers. Cutter forces are usually difficult to estimate, sometimes theoretical and empirical models are not found satisfactory and experimental tests are preferred which are time consuming and expensive in most cases. It is of prime interest to researchers to compare theoretical or empirical values with experimental results. This paper is aimed to contribute in this respect. Many researchers have studied the effect of a wide range of parameters to predict the performance of tunnel boring machines (TBMs) since last 40 The constant cross section (CCS type) disc cutters have been preferred having diameter of 330–508 All the variables in Eqs. After explanation of the base pressure or total forces acting on a disc ( Rolling force (Eq.   V type disc cutter profile provides high advance rate for TBMs if the cutter is new. They deteriorate quickly in abrasive and hard rocks decreasing the efficiency of rock cutting process. In the late 1970s, considering the bluntness on V type disc cutters, CCS type disc cutters were designed to maintain a more or less constant profile along with wearing. Increasing diameter of CCS type disc cutters provide also high bearing capacity, which improves the performance of the machine ( The main objective of this paper is to investigate the effect of different rock properties, and the size and the geometry of CCS disc cutters on cutter forces and to develop empirical tool force estimation equations. Three different rock samples (arcose, shale and fossilized limestone) have been selected for this purpose. Firstly, mineralogical and petrographical analysis, rock cutting tests, and physical and mechanical characteristics of three different rock types are carried out in the laboratory. Secondly, the effect of cutter spacing, tip width, disc diameter and penetration on cutter forces are analyzed and compared with theoretical models developed by different researchers for disc cutters. Finally, a new model modified after Prediction of normal and rolling forces acting on CCS type disc cutters is very important for feasibility determination of TBM excavated underground openings, since almost all of the current hard rock TBMs use CCS type disc cutters. Linear cutting experiments are comparatively more expensive and requires long time and experienced personnel, although they generate highly reliable tool forces. Therefore, other means of obtaining/predicting tool forces, which are quite limited in current literature, becomes very important. In the literature there is only three studies ( A new empirical model is suggested in this study to predict normal and rolling forces acting on CCS type disc cutters. The model is validated by linear cutting experiments previously performed by the authors of this study on three different rock samples by using 2 different CCS type disc cutters having diameters of 330 All tests are performed in three different rock types: arcose, shale and fossilized limestone. The intact rock samples are obtained from Kurtkoy Formation (arcose), Gozdag Formation (shale) and Kirklareli Formation (fossilized limestone) along the tunnel lines in Istanbul where tunnel boring machines in metro projects were used. The physical and mechanical properties of the rock samples are determined according to The full scale linear cutting machine (LCM) used in this study is established in the laboratories of Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Mining Engineering Department ( The independent linear cutting test variables in this study consist of five major variables: rock type (one block of fossilized limestone, and one block of arcose and one block of shale samples), cutting mode (unrelieved and relieved), cutter penetration (3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 12 TBM cutting action is simulated in the laboratory by cutting several passes with a CCS type disc cutter before data recording, which is called “surface conditioning”. After conditioning, one or two passes (layers) of unrelieved cuts are performed by cutting over the every other cut lines. After unrelieved cuts completed, at least two or three passes of conditioning cuts are performed and then relieved cuts are performed by cutting over the each cut lines. In order to understand the efficiency of cutting, rock surface is cleaned and the structural properties like grain size, chipping conditions and sizes are checked.  Physical and mechanical properties of the rock samples are summarized in Rock cutting tests with 330 As seen in The effect of cutter penetration on normal force, rolling force and specific energy values for unrelieved cutting mode is seen in The effect of cutter penetration on normal force, rolling force and optimum cutter spacing/cutter penetration ( The theoretical calculations for CCS type disc cutters are carried out for three different rock types using Eqs. Theoretical tool forces obtained from the model developed by A rock cutting theory for V type cutters was developed by As seen in In order to understand the effect of edge radius on rock cuttability, Theoretical forces calculated from Experimental and empirical tool forces obtained from the model developed by Relieved mode is defined as there is interaction between cutting grooves and unrelieved mode is defined as three is no interaction between cutting grooves. Cutter forces are always higher in unrelieved mode than relived mode for the same penetration value and within the practical values of line spacings. After statistical interpretation, a calibration factor ( The comparisons of experimental and modified Bilgin Model for relieved cutting mode are given in Bilgin’s empirical model for unrelieved cutting mode ( The sources cover the results published by Relationships between experimental normal and rolling forces and theoretical normal and rolling forces developed by Statistically derived equations for cutter forces obtained from literature, experimental and predicted values from A new model is suggested in this study to predict the normal and rolling forces acting on CCS type disc cutters by modifying an empirical model previously developed by The predictions of normal and rolling forces acting on CCS type disc cutters by using the suggested empirical model are validated by the tool forces obtained from linear cutting experiments previously performed by the authors of this study on three different rock samples in relieved (interactive) and unrelieved (uninteractive) cutting modes and some of the experimental data obtained from recent literature. The results indicate that the suggested empirical model predicts reliably the normal forces with a slight overestimation, although the rolling force predictions show some scatter. The scatter on predictions of the rolling force and overestimation of the normal force might be due to lack of data to obtain the calibration factor used in the suggested empirical model. Normal force increases with increasing cutter diameter, while rolling force shows the opposite trend, which is not convenient with the theoretical considerations on rock cutting science. It is also indicated in this study that a previously suggested theoretical model developed for CCS type disc cutters by This paper is based on the PhD thesis of Deniz Tumac. The authors are grateful for the support of Istanbul Technical University (ITU) Research Foundation (Project No: 32361), the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK 106M298), and all research people involved in this project. The authors also express their special thanks to Prof. Nuh Bilgin and Prof. Hanifi Copur for their valuable comments and suggestions.