Orai1 is a pore-subunit of store-operated Ca2+ release-activated Ca2+ (CRAC) channel that mediates Ca2+ influx in most non-excitable cells via store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) mechanism. We previously demonstrated that Orai1 is involved in mediating osteogenic potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), but the underlying mechanism of this function remains unknown. Here, we report that Orai1 mediates osteogenic differentiation via bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling pathway in bone marrow MSCs (BMSCs). In osteogenic conditions, BMSCs derived from wild-type mice underwent osteoblastic differentiation and induced mineralization as demonstrated by increased alkaline phosphatase activity and alizarin red S staining, respectively. The expression of Runx2, a master regulator of osteoblast differentiation, and osteogenic differentiation markers were markedly increased in wild-type BMSCs under osteogenic conditions. In contrast, osteogenic conditions failed to induce such effects in BMSCs derived from Orai1-deficient (Orai1
                     −/−) mice, indicating that Orai1 is, in part, necessary for osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. We also found that BMP2 successfully induced phosphorylation of Smad1/5/8, the immediate effector molecules of BMP signaling, in wild-type BMSCs, but failed to do so in Orai1
                     −/− BMSCs. Downstream target genes of BMP signaling pathway were consistently increased by osteogenic conditions in wild-type BMSCs, but not in Orai1
                     −/− BMSCs, suggesting a novel molecular link between Orai1 and BMP signaling pathway in the osteogenic differentiation process. Further functional studies demonstrated that activation of BMP signaling rescues osteogenic differentiation capacity of Orai1
                     −/− BMSCs. In conclusion, Orai1 regulates osteogenic differentiation through BMP signaling, and the Orai1-BMP signaling may be a possible therapeutic target for treating bone-related diseases.Calcium ion (Ca Orai1 is an essential pore-subunit of CRAC channel that are extensively studied in immune cells such as T-cells Although Orai1 was originally identified from immune cells, increasing lines of evidence support a notion that Orai1 also plays an important role in other types of cells. Indeed, recent studies showed the importance of Orai1 in bone biology. In particular, Orai1 knockout mice showed osteoporotic phenotypes, and inhibition of Orai1 functions lead to impaired osteoclast and osteoblast differentiation Osteoblasts are bone-forming cells that are derived from mesenchymal precursors such as bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs). Differentiation of BMSCs into bone-forming osteoblasts requires orchestrated regulation of different signaling pathways such as BMP2 and Wnt Here, we used BMSCs isolated from The antibodies used for the western blot analysis were anti-p-Smad1/5/8 (#9511P, Cell Signaling), anti-Smad1 (#6944P, Cell Signaling), anti- β-catenin (#D59D7, Origene), and anti-Gapdh (sc-47724, Santa Cruz). Recombinant proteins, BMP2 (#355BM-010) and Wnt3a (#1234-WN), were all purchased from R&D Systems. Primary bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs) were isolated from the femurs obtained from 6-weeks-old mice. Briefly, inside of the mouse femur was flushed and cultured in the culture dish with α-MEM (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA), 20% FBS (Life Technologies), glutamine (200 mM; Life Technologies), and 2-mercaptoethanol (55 mM; Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). After culture for 16 h, non-adherent cells were discarded, and the adherent cells were cultured. BMSCs that are under 5 passages were used. All experiments using mice in this study were performed according to the approved institutional guidelines from the Chancellor's Animal Research Committee (ARC # 2011-062). Cells were plated on UV-sterilized coverslips one day prior to imaging. Next day, cells were loaded with 1 mM Fura 2-AM for 45 min at 25 °C, and intracellular [Ca BMSCs were transduced with retroviruses capable of overexpressing the constitutively active BMPR1B. The pLPCX empty vector was purchased from Clontech (Mountain View, CA, USA), and pLPCX-BMPR1B(Q203D) was purchased from the Addgene (#12642, Cambridge, MA, USA) Total RNA was isolated and cDNA were made as described previously Cells were washed twice with PBS before treatment with ice-cold lysis buffer [20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA and 1% Triton X-100]. The cells were then scraped and incubated on ice for 10 min. Cell debris was separated by centrifugation at 20,000 ALP staining/activity was performed using ALP staining kit (86R-1KT, Sigma–Aldrich, Inc.) according to the manufacturer's protocol. ALP activity was measured using pNNP substrate and alkaline buffer solution (Sigma–Aldrich, Inc.). For ARS staining, cells were fixed with 1% formalin/PBS for 10 min and stained with 2% ARS solution (pH 4.1 to 4.3 with 10% ammonium hydroxide) for 30 min at the room temperature. ARS solution was removed, and cells were washed with ddH The freshly isolated femur was snap-frozen in hexane using liquid nitrogen and 2-methyl butane and was embedded in a 5% carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) gel. Five μm thick sections were prepared using Kawamoto's film method (Cryofilm transfer kit; Finetec, Tokyo). The sections were fixed in ice-cold 5% acetic acid in ethanol and subjected to ALP staining using ALP staining kit (86R-1KT) according to the manufacturer's protocol. The outcome measurements from experiments were displayed as the mean ± standard deviation. To compare the means of outcome measurements, a student t test was conducted using SPSS 23 software (IBM Corp, Somers, NY). p values < 0.05 was considered significant. Previously, we showed that Orai1 inhibits odontogenic differentiation of DPSCs To further examine the involvement of other genes associated with SOCE, we screened for the expression patterns of Orai and Stim family members. Similar to our previous study, the expression of Osteogenic differentiation is mediated by different signaling pathways including BMP2 and Wnt Because the BMP2 signaling pathway was suppressed in Previous findings including our study suggested that Orai1 is involved in osteogenic and odontogenic differentiation to form mineralized tissues Ca Our study showed that reconstituting the BMP signaling pathway using constitutively active BMPR1B rescued suppression of osteogenic differentiation in Previous studies showed that extracellular Ca It is interesting to note that, although ALP activity was significantly suppressed in In conclusion, we showed that Orai1 plays a critical role in BMP2-mediated osteogenic differentiation in BMSCs. Further studies on mechanistic aspects of Orai1 involvement in osteogenic differentiation in the BMP2/Smad pathway may provide potential therapeutic targets to improve bone-related diseases such as osteoporosis. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. This study was supported by the grants from