Hydraulic fracturing to enhance permeability of tight reservoirs is meaningful but difficult in constructing of complex fracture network. This study aimed to examine the effectiveness of tight porous reservoir stimulation in the context of hydraulic fracturing to increase the fracture complexity as much as possible. The simulation experiments were performed to reasonably establish the relation between the laboratory results and the field fracturing operations. Large size stratified and intact samples were casted to resist the size and boundary effects by mixing river sand and/or pulverized coal with concrete cement and freshwater in specific proportions. The samples with artificial slot orienting were casted to understand the fracture initiation, orientation, and deflection mechanisms considering the influence of caprock structure and re-fracturing without temporary plugging. The samples were tested under the scaled geostress conditions of corresponding in-situ stress with a true triaxial loading system, and the reasonable dimensionless groups derived from the literature. Consequently, this study proposed an asymmetric fracturing method based on the experimental results considering the scaling structure of overlying-reservoir-underlying in porous reservoirs. The local asymmetric fracturing is a type of reservoir stimulation method with small scale high-pressure fluids such as carbon dioxide，liquid nitrogen, water, etc., jet cutting to create slot and perforation for the aid of fracture initiation and orientation. Hydraulic fractures were influenced by the fracture-induced stress shadow and ratio of the maximum to minimum horizontal stress. The validation and comparative results showed that, compared with the re-fracturing, the asymmetric fracturing significantly increased the complexity of fracture network. Although the applicability of the asymmetric fracturing depending on the corresponding engineering pilots, the derived method could hopefully address the properties of the strata structure of the reservoirs efficiently. Therefore, it has a high potential for application in the fracturing of local underground coal seam and special-trap type oil gas reservoirs to construct fracture network.The preference for clean energy appears to be irreversible ( The reservoir stimulation is to target complex fracture network ( To approach sufficient reservoir stimulation, numerous fracturing methods flourished in oil and gas industry and underground coal mining, such as, directional fracturing with vertical multi-radial boreholes ( This study dedicates to lay the foundation of asymmetric fracturing with artificial slot orienting in tight reservoirs. The asymmetry refers to injection of pressurized fluids to equal or unequal pore pressure in the specific technical boreholes with adjacent and asymmetric orienting measurements, the key of which is to change and control the induced stress around the boreholes distributing asymmetrically. The applied stress typically influences on the fracture network geometry ( In addition, as a sealing layer like the top-bottom strata adjacent to the coal seams, the caprock effects that some studies mentioned above have not focused on ( First, large size stratified and intact samples were casted and well cured, respectively, according to the concrete curing specifications at sizes of 500 × 500 × 500 mm for plan A and 1140 × 600 × 600 mm for plans B and C to resist the size and boundary effects. The sample material components consisted of filling agents (river sand and pulverized coal), cementing agents (ordinary Portland cement at a strength grade of 32.5 MPa and gypsum powder), and additive agent (the retarder, aqueous solution of borax at a concentration of 0.1% by total mass of filling agents and cementing agents). The modelling materials of the reservoirs and overlying/underlying stratum were stirred well and prepared by mixing the river sand and/or pulverized coal with the ordinary Portland cement and borax solution in the specific proportions, as shown in The experimental system employed the When the samples were casted, the slots were simulated by filling with the package cardboards at a size of 45 mm (diameter) × 3 mm (thickness) that could still maintain a specific shape after soaked in water-containing modelling materials. According to Research personnel occasionally has to consider the limitation of experimental conditions. Thus, lab experiments should be performed to reasonably establish the relation between the laboratory results and the field operations. The initiation and propagation of on-site hydraulic fractures can be attributed to three mechanisms, namely viscosity, toughness, and leak-off dominated regimes ( Here, The experimental parameters can be validated if the dimensionless groups of the laboratory experiments derived from the parameters listed in Here, To understand the fracture initiation, orientation, and deflection mechanisms considering the influence of overlying and underlying strata, a stratified sample containing abundant lamination with a singular slot was prepared in the context of plan A, as shown in The first fluid pressure rise/drop was probably attributed to the non-uniform fracture initiation of the preformed slot with material blockage; the second fluid pressure rise/drop was probably the actual fracture initiation and propagation along the modelling discontinuities; whereas the third fluid pressure rise/drop could be caused by a sharp increase in the frictional resistance of the fracture interface caused by fracture deflecting and extending unsteadily. The first and second rise/drop variation of the pressure during the injection were distorted compared to the third one that should be the actual breakdown pressure. As the fractures shown in  Following the plan A, the sample of plan B was tested to further understand the fracture initiation, orientation, and deflection mechanisms in the context of the re-fracturing without temporary plugging. The fluid pressure-time plot showed that the fluid pressure rapidly increased during the first fluid injection, and then swiftly increased to the breakdown pressure of ∼3.72 MPa at 37 s after the servo supercharger turned on, as shown in Compared with the Ⅰ and Ⅱ stages, the fluid pressure gradient obviously increased in the Ⅲ stage, which indicated that the flow friction of the fracture wall increased significantly. One possible explanation is that the fracture size increase leads to increase in frictional resistance of the fluid flow. In fact, this inference has been validated by the results in The top-bottom strata adjacent to the coal seam was fractured, which was favor of the rock fragments and branch fractures getting interconnected and were significant for the gas production in the context of singular slot for orienting re-fracturing, as shown by the fractures with mottled colors in To investigate the fracture initiation, orientation, and deflection mechanisms of asymmetric fracturing, a sample depicted in plan C was fractured and re-fractured. The fluid injection derived fracture trace on the surface of the sample was depicted in The fluid pressure slowly increased initially when the fracturing fluid was injected into the borehole with the aid of perforation before rapidly increasing to the breakdown pressure of ∼7.41 MPa. Then, the pressure rapidly decreased to ∼3.25 MPa and repeatedly oscillated between 2.87 MPa and 3.57 MPa, as shown in The traces suggested that the multi-fractures were derived and got redirection. However, the re-fracturing practically continued to extend the incipient fractures. As the fracturing process at the first stage shown in The simultaneous fracturing ( The stimulation efficacy and efficiency of the asymmetric fracturing could be well improved with the aid of the newest fracturing methods. And it has a high potential for application in local fracturing by maximizing the associated stress shadow in the vicinity of the creating and natural fractures. For instance, the most dangerous local regions where the coal uncovering at the crossdrift is conducted in the underground coal mining need to be fracturing stimulation to control the gas disasters. It is a mining engineering case in southwest China, as shown in The alternatively buried brittle and ductile formations can greatly impact the propagation of hydraulic fractures. However, the pore pressure affects fracture orientation ( The effective range of the proposed fracturing method is temporarily available only through the experimental results in this study as the lack of complex on-site geological settings ( This study addressed the effectiveness of the reservoir stimulation in the context of hydraulic fracturing in low permeable porous reservoirs, which remained a continuous hot topic for the conventional/unconventional oil and gas industries. Accordingly, the stratified and intact samples were prepared by mixing river sand and/or pulverized coal with concrete cement in specific proportions and adding sufficient water to overcome the size and boundary effects. The complexity of the hydraulic fractures is subject to the heterogeneity of the material and the caprock structure. A comparative study of asymmetric fracturing combined with re-fracturing was then conducted based on the indoor experiments. The preliminary results showed that the asymmetric fracturing with slot and perforation orientation significantly increased the fracture complexity, thereby resulting in the deflection of several fractures compared with the re-fracturing that only normally generated a few new fractures. Furthermore, the far field stress of the hydraulic fractures was affected by the fracturing-induced stress shadow and controlled by the This study was funded by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at The intellectual property involved in this article belongs to Prof. Guangzhi Yin, Chongqing University.