Solvent extraction of indium from hydrochloric acid solution using N,N-di(1-methyl-eptyl) acetamide (N503), di(l-methylheptyl)methyl phosphate (P350), and tributyl phosphate (TBP) diluted in sulfonated kerosene was investigated. Extraction was studied as a function of hydrochloric acid and chloride ion concentrations, organic-phase composition, initial indium concentration, phase contact time, and aqueous/organic (A/O) volumetric ratio. The extraction stoichiometry was determined by slope analysis and confirmed by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy. It was found that indium extraction efficiency decreased in the order: N503 > P350 > TBP. The extracted complexes with N503 and P350 were determined to be [InCl4]−[2S·H]+; the complex formed with TBP was [InCl4]−[3S·H]+, where S represents the neutral extractant species. N503 was found to be best extractant of the three with respect to extracting indium from solutions containing a high concentration of hydrochloric acid. Almost quantitative (99%) indium extraction was obtained using 0.5 mol·L−1 N503 in three extraction stages at an A/O ratio of 2/1; 100% of the indium on the loaded organic phase was stripped by water in two stages at an A/O ratio of 1/3. Indium can therefore be extracted from hydrochloric acid and enriched in a low-acidity strip solution.Indium is widely used for various commercial purposes owing to its key physical and chemical properties. It is, for example, prevalent in indium tin oxide and semiconductor materials ( Solvent extraction provides an efficient way of recovering and separating indium from solution. Commercial acidic extractants that have been investigated include di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) ( Neutral extractants have been recognized as having the advantages of low solubility in water, high extraction efficiency, and ease of stripping ( The basic conditions of the experiments such as stirring speed of mixers, contact time, temperature were initially determined by consulting the relevant literature, and the optimum conditions of the experiments were determined by complete randomalized design. The aim of the present work was to study recovery of indium from hydrochloric acid solution by neutral extractants and stripping with water, with the objective of reducing chloride ion discharge in indium extraction processes. In this study, N503, P350, and TBP were employed as extractants. The effects of hydrochloric acid concentration, chloride ion concentration, organic-phase composition, initial indium concentration, and aqueous/organic (A/O) volumetric ratio were studied. The extraction stoichiometries were determined by slope analysis and the required number of extraction and stripping stages identified from McCabe–Thiele analysis. Commercial extractants N503 (>97%), P350 (>97%), and TBP (>98%) were supplied by Shanghai Rare-Earth Chemical Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China) and used without further purification. The structures of the extractants are shown in A WFS-120 atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS) (Beijing Beifen-Ruili Analytical Instrument Co., Ltd., Beijing, China) was employed for the determination of the aqueous concentrations of the metal ions; the concentrations of metal in the organic phase were calculated by mass balance. Extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by mixing the organic and aqueous phases at selected volumetric ratios in a separating funnel and shaking for 5 min at 298 ± 1 K unless otherwise noted. Counter-current experiments were performed in a box-style mixer–settler unit that contained several stages. The stirring speed of the mixers was 500 rpm. After phase separation, the concentration of indium in the aqueous phase was determined by AAS. These concentrations were used to calculate the distribution coefficient ( Studies have been performed in order to select the extractant with the highest extraction efficiency from the three kinds of neutral extractants. Based on previous studies, kerosene was selected as diluent used with every tested extractant ( The influence of HCl concentration on the extraction of In(III) from chloride solutions containing 1 g·L  Based on the stability constants of [InCl The extraction of In(III) from hydrochloric acid solution by TBP has been previously discussed and it was observed that the organic-phase complex appeared to be HInCl The extraction of In(III) from acidic chloride solution by neutral extractants can be expressed by the following reaction: The distribution ratio D of indium in the organic phase and the aqueous phase during the extraction process can be expressed as: The effect of aqueous-phase acidity on the extraction of In(III) using 0.5 mol·L The results reported in The impact of chloride ion concentration on the extraction of In(III) was determined by varying its concentration from 0 to 2 mol·L To ascertain the form of the metal ion during the extraction of In(III) using 0.5 mol·L The effect of N503,P350 and TBP concentration on the extraction of In(III) from hydrochloric acid solution was carried out using extractant concentrations of 0.1–1 mol·L From the slope-analysis data shown in The numbers of solvating extractant molecules involved in the extraction differ for TBP, P350 and N503. This may be due to the difference in the extractant structures. This is the reason why N503 and P350 show better extraction efficiency for In(III) than TBP. By studying the extraction process of indium with different extraction temperature it can be gathered that the enthalpy change and entropy change in the process of forming extraction complex. Further In(III) extraction tests from 6 mol/L HCl were performed by using these extractants of 0.5 mol/L and at an O/A ratio equal to 1, as shown in The enthalpy change (ΔH) of indium extracted by N503 and TBP determined on the ground of Eqs. As it can be observed in Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) absorption spectra of the extractants and the In(III)-loaded organic phases diluted in sulfonated kerosene were analyzed to determine the nature of the interactions between the extractants and the metal ion. The infrared spectra of each extractant, before and after extraction of In(III), are presented in The FTIR spectra of TBP and indium-bonded TBP show the same characteristic peaks at 1026.1 cm The FTIR spectra of P350 indicate that the characteristic peak at 1249.8 cm The absorption peak at 1652.9 cm On the ground of those results it is evident that the extraction efficiencies of P350 and N503 were better than that of TBP. N503 is the more economical of these two, so would expect to be preferred for practical applications. Indium extraction and stripping isotherms were therefore determined using this extractant. The effect of phase ratio (A/O) in the range 0.5–25 on the extraction of In(III) was carried out using a hydrochloric acid of 6 mol·L A McCabe–Thiele plot was constructed for 0.5 mol·L Preliminary indium stripping tests from loaded organic phases containing 1.033 g·L To determine the number of stages required for stripping of indium from the N503 loaded organic phase at the chosen phase ratio, stripping studies were carried out with water at A/O ratios varying from 1/8 to 1/1 while keeping the total volume of both phases constant. The stripping of In(III) increased from 61.1% to 99.6% as the A/O increased from 1/8 to 1/1. The McCabe–Thiele plot ( Based on the extraction and stripping data shown in Solvent extraction of indium from hydrochloric acid solution containing 1 g·L N503, P350, and TBP showed good extraction properties and may be used as potential extractants in practical application. The indium efficiency decreased in the order of N503 > P350 > TBP when the HCl concentration exceeded 5 mol·L The extraction reactions with N503, P350, and TBP were identified by applying slope analysis. The extracted species were proposed as [InCl N503 was the best of these extractants for extraction of indium from solutions containing high concentrations of hydrochloric acid. Some 99% indium was extracted using 0.5 mol·L  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financially supported by the