Mezino coal contains a high percentage of ash and both organic and inorganic sulfur. The ash and sulfur contents can be reduced using physical–chemical and chemical methods. ‘Froth flotation’ is a physical–chemical method that is capable of reducing inorganic sulfur and the ash content of coal. In this research, reducing the ash content of mezino coal by 83%, inorganic sulfur by 72% and its total sulfur content by 63% using flotation in alkaline pH and in the presence of copper ion was successful. The coal flotation obtained was 73%. The coal concentration obtained from flotation was leached using potassium hydroxide/methanol mixture and its total sulfur and ash contents were reduced by approximately 33 and 8%, respectively. Hence, using the combination of the two mentioned methods, the total sulfur and ash contents of coal were reduced by 82.50 and 82.34%, respectively. It is an unprecedented and welcome result compared to the previous work.Recently coal is being regarded as an energy resource and a suitable replacement for oil and natural gas in many countries. Since, coal has a high thermal content, it can be used to generate heat in various industries. Currently in most countries where there are no large oil or natural gas resources, coal is used in steel plants, power plants and also in households in the form of briquettes. Coal usually contains a significant quantity of different metallic and nonmetallic impurities that cause environmental or process problems in its usage cycle. Due to this fact, many studies have been carried out to reduce these polluting impurities in coal including those of ash, sulfur, silicates. One of the major pollutants is sulfur which when burned produces hydrogen sulphide and sulfur dioxide. Acid rains are after effects of these gases. Harmful effects on agricultural products, disruption of natural equilibrium of ozone layer, corrosion of metal structures and respiratory problems of humans and animals are undesirable effects of sulfur and its compounds. Sulfur in coal is found in both organic and inorganic forms. The amount of each form can be reduced using different techniques. Inorganic sulfur in coal is usually found as sulfate and sulfide compounds, which can be reduced using froth flotation. Organic sulfur is embedded in the chemical structure of coal and may be reduced by up to 50% using chemical methods. Leaching is one of the common methods employed for coal desulfurization. Coal is mixed with acid or alkali and its sulfur is extracted while being heated or stirred. The type of reagent depends upon the type of sulfur in the coal. The pyritic sulfur (iron sulfide) is usually reduced using the direct leaching method with acid. This method is the most effective method in eliminating metal compounds from coal Semra Karaca has undertaken leaching with nitric acid on a coal sample from Ashkal coal mine. In this experiment coal samples were dissolved in nitric acid and stirred at 25–103 In another work carried out by Louie et al. ‘sulfate’ sulfur was removed using formic acid. Four different types of coal were leached with hydrochloric acid at three different temperatures (ambient temperature, 95 and 110 As previously stated, alkalis can be used instead of acids in leaching of the coal. Results showed that using sodium hydroxide (10% concentrates) at temperature of 250 A mixture of potassium hydroxide and ethanol were also used as the solvent in leaching process. Charutawai Krittka carried out this process in a reactor using a nitrogen atmosphere with 8.27 Ratanakandilok applied a similar method using a mixture of potassium hydroxide and methanol. For 1 Due to the cost of chemical methods, the combination of flotation and leaching method was used in the present research for desulfurization of mezino coal. Coal: the coal sample collected from mezino (11th Km) coal mine in Tabas, Iran, Pine oil; Gas oil and copper sulfate (CuSO Barium chloride, sodium carbonate, magnesium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid, methyl orange, ammonia, bromine, ethanol and nitric acid were used to measure different types of sulfur in coal using ASTM method. Potassium hydroxide and methanol were used in leaching process of coal. Jaw crusher, Rod-Ball mill, sieve, flotation device, magnet heater, electrical furnace, electrical oven, COD reactor, atomic absorption device, pH meter, vacuum filter and conical splitter were used in this research. The sample was crushed into the size of 250 The coal sample was crushed to 250 The coal sample was crushed to 250 ASTM D-3177 standard ASTM D-2492 standard The weight of sulfur in samples was finally calculated using gravimetery.  Percentage of total sulfur content Percentage of sulfate sulfur content Weight of crucible and BaSO Weight of empty crucible used for combustion of sample including sulfate (g) Weight of empty crucible used for combustion of blank sample Weight of crucible and blank sample sulfate Weight of original coal sample ASTM D-2492 standard was used to measure the pyritic sulfur content of the coal sample. The precipitate resulting from measuring sulfate sulfur content in coal was used for this purpose. The iron content of the sample was measured using atomic absorption and the sulfur content calculated.  Percentage of pyritic sulfur Stoichiometric ratio of sulfur to iron in FeS Dilution factor required for atomic absorption=20 (dimensionless factor) Volume of solution used in atomic absorption=100 converting factor in transforming micrograms into grams=10 converting factor in changing numbers into percentages=100 Iron concentration in the coal sample (μg/ml) Iron concentration in the blank sample (μg/ml) Weight of the original coal sample (g) If the sum of pyritic and sulfate sulfur contents are subtracted from total sulfur content, the result was the organic sulfur content. As previously described, the coal sample to be studied was prepared from 11th Km layer of mezino coal mine in Tabas, Iran. After delivery to the laboratory the sample was left to dry at the room temperature. Then it was crushed using a jaw crusher. In each experiment the sample was ground into the desired particle size and then divided. In this research, the combination of flotation and leaching methods were used for the desulfurization of mezino coal. First the inorganic sulfur content of the sample was reduced to the maximum extent by froth flotation and then the flotation concentration was leached to remove further sulfur. These steps undertaken are explained in the following sections. Finch and Dichmann used copper sulfate to remove pyrite content from other minerals To perform the flotation process the test sample was produced according to ASTM D-2234  In which: Sulfur or ash percentage in concentrate Weight of concentrate (g) Sulfur or ash percentage in feed Weight of feed (g) Sulfur or ash removal is calculated by this equation: The optimum condition was when the highest reduction of sulfur and the highest amount of concentrate were obtained. Therefore the operating condition of pH=7 and copper ion concentration of 1.58 was selected as the optimum since this gave the lowest quantity of total sulfur (1.43%) and the highest amount of concentrate (55.44 Leaching was carried out using a potassium hydroxide/methanol mixture. The potassium hydroxide concentration, methanol concentration, temperature and time were the variables whose effects were studied in the reduction of organic and pyritic sulfur. Taguchi's L9 array was used to determine the effect of each factor on leaching. In the present paper, applications of the experimental design based on the Taguchi methods are described in detail.. In the full resolution in order to study×factors at Experimental designs were first introduced by Fisher as an agricultural research tool in the 1920s Genichi Taguchi Orthogonal arrays were used to assign factors to a series of experimental combinations which results could then be analyzed by using a common mathematical procedure. The main effect of these factors and preselected interactions between the factors were independently extracted. The identification of controlling factors and the quantitation of the magnitude of the effects was emphasized rather than just the identification of statistically significant effects. The number of trial chosen for an experimental design was based on the resolution desired. Therefore, to investigate four factors with three level L9 array including nine tests was selected  In each of the nine test runs, a 20% by weight pulp was made using 2  The potassium hydroxide/methanol mixture is a polar solvent, which has a high power in dissolving polar molecules existing in coal i.e. due to the existence of hydrogen bonds and the dipolar attraction forces. Potassium hydroxide acts better than methanol in breaking bonds and side chains of coal and is capable of breaking C–S bond. After removing the test tubes from the reactor, their contents were filtered using a filter paper and the coal obtained was repeatedly washed with water for four times to remove all potassium sulfide and iron oxides. Finally the remained coal was dried at ambient temperature and weighed. The sulfur and ash contents were measured. The results were brought in  Weight of original dry sample Weight of dried sample after leaching Sulfur percentage in the original sample Sulfur percentage in the coal obtained from leaching Ash percentage in the original sample Ash percentage in the coal obtained from leaching. To calculate the total reduction of sulfur (or ash), the following formula was used: The results of sulfur and ash reduction by froth flotation are given in The effect of each variable and its optimum level for maximum reduction of ash is given in As observed in The effect of each variable and its optimum level for maximum reduction of sulfur is shown in As shown in The results of the leaching process for all runs are given in The effect of each variable and its optimum level for maximum reduction of ash in the leaching process is given in   The increase in temperature had a positive effect on ash reduction in leaching process. As observed in The ash reduction decreased considerably by increasing the leaching time. After 60 The effect of each variable and its optimum level in achieving the maximum reduction of total sulfur in the leaching process is shown in  Potassium hydroxide was very efficient at removing the sulfur content of coal. At lower concentrations it had a reverse effect on sulfur reduction. As shown in The results showed that methanol alone had no significant effect on sulfur reduction. As shown in Temperature had a positive effect on sulfur reduction in leaching process. Sulfur reduction increased by the increase in temperature and maximum reduction occurred at 120 The sulfur reduction showed a significant decrease by increasing leaching time. For the first 30 The results of total amount of sulfur and ash reduction by both froth flotation and the leaching process are presented in The leaching process was carried out on the concentrate obtained from the flotation of mezino coal. The froth flotation was carried out at pH 7 and a copper ion concentration of 15.8 We sincerely thank the faculty and staff of Tarbiat Modarres University, Amirkabir University of Technology and Iran Oil Industry Research Center for their valuable cooperation in providing laboratory facilities and equipment. One of the authors (K. Rami) is grateful to Dr Kiavash Kianfar for assisting during the research.