The voltammetric, ultraviolet techniques and contact angle measurements were used to investigate the oxidation of xanthate and the reduction of dixanthogen on synthetic and natural enargite electrodes which were kept under a fixed potential. The effect of applied potential on the enargite electrode surface in potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) solutions at pH 10 and 7 was investigated by contact angle measurement after the electrodes were conditioned for 10 min. The effect of PAX concentration on enargite floatable potential range was also studied. The hydrophobic film on the enargite surface was extracted using hexane and examined by ultraviolet spectroscopy. The results indicate that the hydrophobic film on the enargite surface in PAX solution was dixanthogen, and it began to form on the enargite electrode surface in 7×10−4 M PAX solution from −0.2 V vs. Standard Calomel Electrode at pH 10 and from −0.275 V vs. Standard Calomel Electrode at pH 7. The floatable potential range of enargite was 60–70 mV narrower in 7×10−5 M PAX solution than in 7×10−4 M PAX solution. The potential needed to reduce dixanthogen on enargite surface was as low as −0.6 V vs. Standard Calomel Electrode.Enargite (Cu Synthetic enargite (Cu The results in Enargite is a semiconductive mineral, which has an orthorhombic crystalline structure. Both As and Cu atoms are surrounded with four S atoms, constituting a quasi-regular tetrahedron. Each S atom is centered in the tetrahedron, which is formed from one As and three Cu atoms ( The sample was prepared as a mineral electrode by connecting it with copper wires and encapsulating it in epoxy resin. The electrode working area of synthetic and natural enargite is 2.2 and Contact angle tests were conducted by placing the mineral surface in a glass cell filled with the potassium amyl xanthate solution. An air bubble was produced on the mineral surface by a capillary tube. The image of the air bubble and mineral surface was projected on a flat screen by a slide projector and the contact angle was measured on the screen. The potential applied on the mineral electrode was produced by a CMS 105 DC Corrosion Test System potentiostat. A Standard Calomel Electrode was used as a reference electrode, and a large surface area platinum electrode was used as a counter electrode. Xanthate solutions were prepared by dissolving the purified xanthate into a buffer solution in order to keep the pH of the solution stable after the dissolved oxygen in the buffer solution was removed completely by bubbling nitrogen gas through the solution. The PAX used in this study was supplied by Prospec Chemicals. pH 10 buffer solution contained boric acid, potassium chloride and sodium hydroxide and pH 7 buffer solution contained sodium and potassium phosphate. To obtain the contact angle of enargite under different potentials, the enargite mineral electrode was first conditioned under a fixed potential in the PAX solution for a period of 10 min and then the contact angle of the electrode surface was measured using the method described above. In the study of reduction of dixanthogen on the enargite surface, the mineral electrodes were initially subjected to an anodic polarization in the PAX solution to create a dixanthogen film on the mineral surface and then they were subjected to a cathodic polarization in the same solution. The contact angle on the electrode surface was measured during the cathodic polarization. As the formation of dixanthogen on the mineral surface was visible, UV spectroscopy was used to examine both the hexane extract of the solution near the electrode surface and the extract of the mineral electrode surface itself. For examining the solution extract, the solution around the electrode surface was slowly siphoned off and placed into a vial containing hexane immediately and was shaken well to ensure complete extraction. The solution was collected in small amount until 10 ml of the solution was obtained. The ratio of the hexane volume to the solution volume was 1:1. For the purpose of confirmation, UV spectroscopy was also used to examine the hexane extract of the bulk solution (extract ratio 1:1). For examining the extract of the electrode surface, the electrode, which had been subjected to conditioning under a certain potential for 10 min, was taken out from the test cell and the solution attached to the surface of epoxy resin which encapsulated the mineral electrode was wiped carefully with a paper towel (Kimberly–Clark) before the electrode was put into 6 ml hexane in a 50 ml beaker. At most times, no solution was attached on the mineral electrode surface because of its hydrophobicity. If the electrode surface was hydrophilic under the test condition, the visible solution on the mineral surface was adsorbed away carefully by paper towel to avoid disturbing the adsorption on the surface. The UV spectra of the hexane extracts were measured by a Lambda 3 spectrophotometer. In order to determine the potential range, in which the enargite surface was hydrophobic, the contact angle on the mineral electrode surface was measured after the mineral electrode was conditioned at a preset potential for 10 min in the PAX solution. The results for both synthetic and natural enargite in 7×10 A PAX concentration 7×10 The results of The results in  The drop of contact angle in 7×10 Another phenomenon observed in 7×10 Contact angle test result indicates that enargite has very good hydrophobicity in a wide potential range from −0.15 to +0.85 V vs. SCE. Recent publications ( The reaction between the enargite surface and PAX can be seen in The hexane extracts of the solution around the synthetic enargite electrode and the bulk solution were identified as dixanthogen. It is obvious that the solution around the electrode surface at either pH 10 or pH 7 contained more dixanthogen than the bulk solution. This solution was a dixanthogen emulsion simply because dixanthogen's solubility in water is very low and the dixanthogen produced on the electrode surface diffused into the aqueous phase in the form of droplets. The hexane extract solutions at pH 7 required a dilution of ten times since dixanthogen is more stable at pH 7 than at pH 10. In order to verify the adsorption of dixanthogen on the enargite surface at a certain potential, the mineral electrode was conditioned at a preset potential in 7×10 The results in Dixanthogen adsorption was formed on the synthetic enargite electrode surface in the pH 7 PAX solution over the whole potential range from −0.27 to +0.8 V vs. SCE ( Formation of dixanthogen on the natural enargite surface in pH 10 PAX solution increased in the potential range from −0.15 to +0.1 V ( The amount of dixanthogen on the natural enargite surface in pH 7 PAX solution increased from −0.27 to 0.0 V ( The main difference between the results of synthetic enargite and natural enargite, when comparing the results in The main effects of pH is that enargite had a better adsorption of dixanthogen under high potential at lower pH. For example, a absorbance value of 0.56 at 286 nm was obtained for the hexane extract of the synthetic enargite electrode surface in pH 7 PAX solution at 0.8 V while a absorbance value of 0.22 at 286 nm was obtained for the hexane extract of the synthetic enargite electrode surface in pH 10 PAX solution at the same potential. As has been explained before, the thicker oxidation product film at pH 10 was responsible for the decrease of dixanthogen adsorption on enargite surface. When comparing the contact angle measurement results in At low potential (<0.1 V vs. SCE), The contact angle increased as the amount of dixanthogen increased on the enargite surface at initial stage and kept constant after the enargite surface was fully covered with dixanthogen. As the potential was further increased (>0.1 V vs. SCE), the increased thickness of the oxidation products on the enargite surface dramatically reduced the binding force between the dixanthogen and the enargite surface. This led to a significant decrease in dixanthogen detected by the UV spectrum from the hexane extract of the electrode surface. However in the PAX solution the newly produced dixanthogen on enargite surface, which was subject to conditioning at high potential, was enough to sustain a good contact angle at the electrode surface. These findings also led to the conclusion that after some extent further increase of dixanthogen adsorption would not improve the wettability of the enargite surface. Literature about stability of hydrophobic film on sulfide surface is rare. In order to examine the stability of dixanthogen on enargite under reducing conditions, reduction of dixanthogen on the surface of enargite was investigated using cathodic polarization along with contact angle measurements on both the synthetic and the natural enargite electrodes. The mineral electrodes were initially submitted to an anodic polarization scan at a rate of 0.25 mV/s from 0.0 (vs. Eoc-open circuit potential) to +0.8 V (vs. SCE) in PAX solution. Immediately after that, they were subjected to a cathodic polarization from 0.0 (vs. Eoc) to −0.9 V (vs. SCE) in the same solution. The contact angle on the enargite surfaces was measured during the cathodic polarization. The results for synthetic enargite are shown in  The results in  It can be noticed by comparing the results in The stable potential range of dixanthogen in low xanthate concentration solution could be estimated by Nernst equation. The potential at which dixanthogen on the enargite surface begins to reduce will shift 0.059 V to the positive direction for each 10-time dilution of the xanthate concentration.  The results for surface potential and the wettability from the synthetic and the natural enargite electrodes were similar. Dixanthogen began to form on the enargite electrode surface starting at a potential of −0.2 V vs. SCE in 7.5×10 The floatable potential range of enargite was 60–70 mV narrower in 7×10 Enargite could be better removed from chalcopyrite, chalcocite by electrochemical flotation at a pulp potential of greater than 0.05 V vs. SCE. The amount of dixanthogen formed on the enargite surface initially increased with the increase in applied potential on the mineral electrode and then decreased with the increasing potential. The optimum potential range for dixanthogen formation on the enargite surface in 7×10 At a potential range of higher than 0.4 V vs. SCE, the amount of dixanthogen on the enargite surface was higher in the pH 7 solution than in the pH 10 solution. The cathodic polarization voltage required to reduce the dixanthogen film on the enargite surface was as low as −0.6 V vs. SCE in 7×10 The authors wish to thank for the financial support offered by the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada.