Slime coating, defined as a layer of fine or ultrafine hydrophilic particles coated on the larger value mineral surface, has been recognized to have an important effect on froth flotation. These slimes on the mineral surface prevent value mineral particles from contacting with collectors and/or air bubbles, consequently resulting in a lower flotation recovery. It is demonstrated that the high intensity conditioning is an effective way to improve flotation performance. However, the relative significance of its mechanisms on high intensity conditioning still needs to be explored, especially the surface cleaning. In this work, the role of surface cleaning in high intensity conditioning was investigated by carrying out a series of tests including conditioning-flotation, microscope visualization, laser particle size analysis and Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement. The combustible matter recovery is employed to evaluate the flotation performance. The results show that the high intensity conditioning greatly improves the hydrophobicity of coal surface by producing a complete clean surface and consequently enhances the adhesion between coal and collector, which results in a significant increase of the combustible matter recovery no matter with or without the collector. It is also found that surface cleaning is an important factor in the reduction of the reagent consumption. In addition, it is noted that surface cleaning is the internal driving force for the significantly increased recovery of the coarse coal particles. Based on the findings in this work, a prospective high intensity conditioning-flotation process is presented.Froth flotation, a physicochemical separation technique that greatly relies on the differences in wettability of different materials, is the most effective way to treat fine and ultra-fine materials in mining industry, paper recycling or waste-water treatment. However, in mining industry, this process is always threatened by slime coating defined as a layer of fine or ultrafine hydrophilic particles coated on the larger value mineral surface, preventing value mineral particles from contacting with collectors and/or air bubbles, consequently resulting in a lower flotation recovery In the meantime, it is noticed that high intensity conditioning greatly benefits the performance of coal flotation, improving the combustible recovery and flotation selectivity, and at the same time reducing flotation reagents consumption Nowadays it is reported that to maximize coal production and utilization, coal mining operations and preparation have been highly mechanized, which produces high proportions of fine coal The objective of this paper is to investigate the role of surface cleaning in high intensity conditioning, which is expected to gain an insight into the complex mechanism affecting the results. Fine coal middlings was used in this work and its size and ash distribution was analyzed. A series of batch flotation tests under different controlled conditions were conducted to study the effect of surface cleaning on coal flotation. The static particle size analysis (Laser Diffraction Particle Size Analyzer) and in-situ dynamic particle tracking (Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement) coupled with digital optical microscopy was employed to monitor the potential interfacial changes of the particle caused by surface cleaning, which is anticipated to give a whole understanding to the surface cleaning in high intensity conditioning. Middlings, composite ores consisting of value minerals and gangue minerals, has a combined interfacial property of the two components n-Dodecane (purity The high intensity conditioning was conducted in a 1.0 To obtain a direct observation of the coal surface in the presence and absence of the high intensity conditioning, the coal samples were observed by an optical digital microscope (VHX-700F, KEYENCE) with a real zoom lens ranging from 100 It is assumed that if the fine slime is removed from the coal surface, the fine particles in the slurry will increase. Laser diffraction particle size analysis is an effective and fast way to measure the size distribution of particle suspension. In this test, a Mastersizer 3000 (Marlvern, UK) was used to determine the size distributions of the samples under different conditioning speeds. The laser obscuration was ~ Some of the coal particles in a high turbulent flow might be crushed into small particles due to the impact with the cylindrical shell or baffles during the high intensity conditioning. Therefore, the size changes may be attributed to the particle crushing instead of surface cleaning. Similarly, the flotation improvement may be also ascribed to the particle crushing i.e. the re-liberation of the coal particles. To figure out this potential issue, Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement (FBRM, METTLER TOLEDO G400) was used to monitor the dynamic particle size change. This technique allows real-time, in-process measurement of highly turbid samples by using an inline probe containing a laser that is focused to a point at the surface of the probe window, which is in contact with the process sample. The focused beam is rotated in a circular path at a controlled scan speed, and pulses of backscattered light are detected by the probe as the focused beam passes over particles and agglomerates. The length of these pulses correlates to the distance across each particle and, by multiplying the length of each pulse by the scan speed, the distance across each particle (chord length) can be calculated. High numbers of chord lengths are measured each second, which enable changes in the particle size distribution and particle count to be monitored Since no collectors were added during the conditioning or flotation, the surface hydrophobicity played the critical role in the floating of the coal in this test and therefore the effect of surface cleaning can be reflected by the floatability of the coal. As shown in According to the literature, the agitation time is another important factor in high intensity conditioning As mentioned in To attain a direct visualization of the effect of surface cleaning, the coal sample in the absence and presence of high intensity conditioning was observed through an optical digital microscope and the obtained micro-pictures are shown in  D To investigate the effect of surface cleaning on the recovery of coarse coal particles, the size distributions of the flotation concentrates under different conditioning speeds were measured. As shown in The overview of the role of surface cleaning in high intensity conditioning is shown in Slime coating is one of the most serious problems caused by hydrophilic fine particles, which suppresses the flotation of the value minerals. The role of surface cleaning in high intensity conditioning was studied in this work. It is found that high intensity conditioning is an effective way to minimize the deleterious effect of slime coating. The high intensity conditioning made the coal to retrieve a complete clean surface, which significantly improved the hydrophobicity of the coal surface. Consequently, the adhesion between coal and collector was enhanced obviously, resulting in a much higher combustible recovery compared with that of the coal in the absence of high intensity conditioning no matter with or without the collector. The effect of surface cleaning was governed both by the conditioning speed and conditioning time. Furthermore, surface cleaning is an important factor in the reduction of the reagent consumption in conditioning-flotation. In addition, surface cleaning considerably improved the recovery of the coarse coal particles. These findings are expected to provide reference for the optimization of conditioning tank design and conditioning-flotation process. The authors wish to thank the