A process of coal-based direct reduction roasting followed by magnetic separation was used to produce direct reduction iron (DRI) from high-phosphorus oolitic iron ore. The effect of sodium sulfate, which was used as an additive in the roasting process, was investigated. The addition of sodium sulfate increased the iron content and reduced the phosphorus content of DRI, but a sharp increase in the sulfur content of the DRI was observed. Although the S content of the DRI can be reduced to some extent by increasing roasting time as well as improving roasting temperature, its level is still too high for steelmaking. The results of scanning electron microscopy and energy-dispersive spectroscopy showed that when sodium sulfate was added, FeS was generated in the reduced briquette. FeS was intimately intermixed with metallic iron, which was difficult to remove. Therefore, sodium sulfate was not a suitable additive for the reduction of high-phosphorus oolitic hematite ore.Separation preconditioning involves the liberation of valuable minerals from the gangue minerals during mineral processing. However, many iron ores are so fine grained that grinding them to a sufficiently fine size to liberate the iron oxides from the gangues is impractical. Thus, these iron ores are currently not used ( In the present study, a high-phosphorus oolitic iron ore underwent the process of coal-based direct reduction followed by magnetic separation, and sodium sulfate was used as an additive in the roasting process. The effects of sodium sulfate dosage on the quality of DRI, especially on its sulfur content were studied. The phase transitions of sodium sulfate during the roasting and beneficiation processes were studied as well. A high phosphorus oolitic iron ore sample was obtained from Hubei province, China. It contained 43.58% Fe, 17.1% SiO The iron ore, coal, and sodium sulfate and an appropriate amount of water (8% to 12%) were fully mixed and pressed to briquettes in a steel die (30 The chemical analyses of the DRI were conducted in the China University of Geosciences (Beijing) analysis laboratory. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive spectrum (EDS) (Carl Zeiss EVO18) analyses was performed on roasted briquettes mounted on epoxy resin and subsequently polished and carbon sprayed. The effect of sodium sulfate dosage on the roasting-magnetic separation is shown in As the dosage of sodium sulfate increased from 0% to 10%, the iron content of the DRI increased from 83.97% to 93.58%, and the P content decreased from 0.27% to 0.057% ( The effect of roasting time on the magnetic separation results was studied in the presence of 10% sodium sulfate, while the roasting temperature was fixed at 1050 It can be seen from Under the conditions that the dosage of sodium sulfate was 10%, the roasting time was 80 It can be observed that the S content of the DRI decreased from 0.40% to 0.24%, the iron content increased from 92.03% to 95.76%, and the iron recovery increased from 72.64% to 84.64% with increasing roasting temperature from 1000 The above results indicated that the sulfur content of the DRI derived from the addition of sodium sulfate can be reduced to some extent by increasing the roasting time as well as improving the roasting temperature. However, its level is still too high for steelmaking in the electric arc furnace. The SEM images of the roasted briquettes with and without sodium sulfate are shown in In the absence of sodium sulfate, the metallic iron grains (off white color) generated in the reduced briquette were very small, and the oolitic structure of the raw ore was not completely destroyed ( The reactions concerning the generation of FeS were as follows ( These reactions occurred easily during the reduction of low-grade refractory iron ores when sodium sulfate was added.  The SEM image of the DRI product obtained from the roasted briquette with 10% sodium sulfate is shown in The S-containing material observed in the DRI product was Fe–S–O instead of FeS ( In the process of coal-based direct reduction–magnetic separation for treating high-phosphorus oolitic hematite ore, the addition of sodium sulfate improved dephosphorization and increased DRI iron content. However, sodium sulfate also increased the S content of the DRI products. Although the S content of the DRI can be reduced to some extent by increasing roasting time as well as improving roasting temperature, its level is still too high for steelmaking. Sodium sulfate addition caused the formation of FeS, which was closely related to metallic iron grains that were difficult to completely remove by magnetic separation. The residual FeS in the DRI was oxidized to Fe–S–O-bearing material during the process of mineral processing and was still closely associated with the metallic iron. Therefore, sodium sulfate is not a suitable additive for the reduction of high-phosphorus oolitic hematite ore. The authors wish to express their thanks to the