We used water glass solution for bonding two glass wafers on which electrodes and a micro-channel were fabricated. This bonding technique makes possible to bond two glass wafers without concerning the problem of surface roughness. We evaluated many properties of the water glass bonding for using micro-chemical analysis, such as, effect of bond temperature on bond strength, thickness of bonding layer dependence on applied pressure during bonding, and so on. Because of high content rate of sodium in water glass, we evaluated cleaning effect to decrease sodium dissolution from bonding layer. Additionally, we studied the effect of the pH of solutions on bond strength. By using this technology, we made a micro-electrochemical chip as one of applications and identified an oxygen evolution current without break down of the chip. We show this bonding technique is very useful to make a micro-chip.Nowadays, micro-machining technology is recognized as useful technology for making physical sensors and chemical sensors such as micro-total analysis system (μ-TAS) We analyzed the properties of the water glass bonding for chemical analysis, for example, dissolution of sodium from the water glass layer, the effect of bond temperature and the pH of loaded solution on bond strength, and it proved that this technology is useful for making micro-chips for μ-TAS. A Pyrex wafer (#7740, purchased by Furuuchi) and a barium borosilicate wafer (#7059, by Coning) were bonded together to evaluate bonding features. The thickness were 0.5 and 1 The two wafers were cleaned with three kinds of solutions in this order (at 25 The wafers were treated with hydrophilicy using the solution: NH After one of the wafers was attached with a spin coater (Mikasa, 1H-DX2), the water glass solution was dropped on it. Rotation speed was 2000 As soon as one of the wafers was coated with the water glass, the other wafer was put on it with alignment to bond each other. After bonding, they were put on a jig that was able to control the applied pressure by four springs. Then, they were heated in an oven at the rate of 1.5 Ultrasonic microscope (Hitachi, AT5000) was used for obtaining the adhesive bonding rate which shows the ratio of bonded area per sample area. Frequency of transducer was 20 Thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis (TA instrument, SDT-2960) were used to study the chemical reaction on the gel polymerization process X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, Ulvac-phi Co., ESCA-5500MC) and Raman spectrophotometer (Japan Spectroscopic Co., NR-1800, Ar laser (488 To observe cross section of the bonding layer by SEM (Hitachi, S-5000), the bonded wafer was mounted in room-setting epoxy resin. Two types of samples were prepared as follows: firstly, the two Pyrex wafers were bonded each other at 80 Atomic absorption spectrometry (Spectra, A-220FS) was used for measuring the amount of sodium dissolution from bonding layer. Bonding conditions are described in Adhesive bonding rate was measured with a few hour intervals to study the effect of the pH of buffer solutions on bond strength. The buffer solutions within the samples were kept at room temperature. Bonding conditions are described in As shown in A micro-channel was manufactured on the Pyrex wafer by using the dicing saw. The micro-channel had about 0.25 An Au thin layer was built up by vacuum deposition. Au thin film and Cr thin film had 50 and 20 Ag electrode was fabricated in the same way as an Au electrode by using vacuum deposition. The Ag thin film and Cr thin film had 180 and 20 After removing the photoresist by using a remove solution 104 (Tokyo Ohka) at 80 As given in Firstly, the water glass solution was coated on the wafer 1 by using the spin coater (2000 The sample was dipped in 0.1 M FeCl The stability of the Ag/AgCl electrode was measured in 1, 5, 100 and 500 In many factors which affect the bonding properties, firstly, the relationship between bond temperature and bond strength is studied. The result is shown in To investigate the chemical reaction on bonding process, thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis were used. The result is shown in The analytical result by XPS to study the elemental contents of the water glass layer is listed in Before heated in the oven, small amount of water glass solution exists on the bonding surface and it can migrate uneven surface when the solution makes gel polymerization. That is why the bonding technique is successfully to bond wafers without considering the problem of surface roughness. The effect of applied pressure during bonding on thickness of the bonding layer is shown in As discussed in It is very important to study the effect of many kinds of solutions loaded into the micro-channel on the bond strength, since many solutions are used in μ-TAS. It is required to study the properties of the bond strength when acidic or alkaline solutions put into the micro-channel. Adhesive bonding rate was measured to appraise the effect of the pH of buffers with a few hour intervals. The result shows the adhesive bonding rate decreases in the alkaline solution as shown in The micro-chip for electrochemistry was fabricated as one of applications using water glass bonding technique. For the purpose of evaluating the Ag/AgCl electrode on the micro-chip, experimental result ( Equilibrium potential is calculated theoretically using Nernst’s equation described as below: During measuring the anodic polarization curve at high potential (about larger than 3 The pH is changed to higher on the cathode and lower on the anode locally. When the pH is changed to lower on the anode, Au might be apt to be oxidized Finally, the adhesive bonding rate of the electrochemistry chip which was used for measuring the anodic polarization was measured. The result is shown in We have shown that water glass bonding technique is very useful to bond glass wafers, and we studied many properties as follows. The bond strength was from 2 The authors would like to thank Mr. Sugawara, Shibaura Inst. of Tech., Mr. Matsumoto, KITRI, for using thermalgravimetry, Mr. Ishimaru, KITRI, for using atomic spectroscope, Mr. Soga, KITRI, for using XPS, Dr. Aoki, KITRI, and Dr. Magaino, KITRI, for useful suggestions on electrochemical experiments, and Dr. Kitamori, University of Tokyo, for discussing and helpful advice in μ-TAS.