Groundwater contamination by nitrate is one of the several environmental problems that may be caused by the application of organic amendments to agricultural soils, and is a key issue in the European Union's environmental policy. The use of predictive tools such as flow and transport models for soluble forms could be helpful for preventing the risk of contamination after the application of organic amendments. We investigated the dynamics of leachable inorganic nitrogen forms (NH4
                     +-N and NO3
                     −-N) produced by a single high-dose application of three different organic amendments (a municipal solid waste compost (MSWC), and aerobically (AES) and anaerobically (ANS) digested sewage sludge) in an agricultural soil over a two-year period and how solutes migrate through the vadose zone under a Mediterranean climate. Although the mineralization process was determined by the type of amendment, seasonal variations led to the release and transformation of leachable inorganic nitrogen forms. Sewage sludge (AES and ANS) treatments provide a higher proportion of soluble nitrogen forms than MSWC treatment, which produces a more stable organic matter. Under our field conditions, pollutants can accumulate in the vadose zone, constituting a time bomb which may lead to aquifer contamination further down the line. Hence an increase in water input would accelerate the migration of pollutants and increase the risk of groundwater contamination.The application of organic amendments such as sewage sludge (SS) and municipal solid waste (MSW) to agricultural soils has been a common practice in Mediterranean areas and acts as a source of carbon and nitrogen to offset the low content of soil organic matter (SOM) in these soils. However, this practice may entail a number of environmental problems ( The mineralization of organic amendments releases large amounts of nitrogen as ammonium which may turn into nitrate ( Nitrate leaching is influenced by the type of climate, which determines the spatial and temporal rainfall patterns and thus the amount of water percolating through the soil matrix ( The aims of this study were therefore: i) to investigate the dynamic of leachable inorganic N forms (NH The experiment was carried out in an experimental station in Arganda del Rey, in the southeast of the province of Madrid, Spain (UTM X: 457673, UTM Y: 4462824) ( As detailed in Three randomised complete blocks were established with three replicates. Four soil plots (10 The climate at the experimental site is Mediterranean with a continental tendency and a marked seasonal and daily contrast. The average annual rainfall is 430 Soil samples were homogenised and passed through a 2 The process of solute migration towards groundwater after the application of organic amendments was studied using a mathematical model of water flow and solute transport in the vadose zone. Different simulations were performed: the first, for the 24-month experimental period (April, 2010–March, 2012); and the second, for three different scenarios considering annual water input values of 400, 600 and 1000 The mathematical model used in these simulations was previously built using the VS2DTI software package, v. 1.2, developed by the U.S. Geological Survey ( A two-way ANOVA with an interaction term was performed in order to test the effects of the experimental factors (type of amendments and sampling season) on the variables analysed. In the case of significant F-tests, differences between group means were assessed by the Tukey test ( The experimental factor with the greatest effect on total nitrogen was the type of amendment ( The application of organic amendments may cause a disruption in the soil inorganic nitrogen dynamic. External N sources such as organic amendments can affect key steps in N cycling ( At the beginning of the experiment the type of amendment had a significant effect on the soil inorganic nitrogen content ( Three months after application (summer), AES and ANS soils showed a decrease in NH Six months after application (autumn), nitrification still occurred in the amended soils, and especially in AES plots, which continued to have a sufficient supply of ammonium due to the mineralization of organic matter and high values of potential nitrification (0–20 Over the second year, the influence of the application of organic amendments on the soil nitrogen dynamic was less evident. One year after application (spring), organic-amended soils showed low availability of mineral nitrogen, despite better conditions for an increase in N mineralization processes. These results concur with In summary, the transformation processes and mobility of soil inorganic nitrogen work in conjunction as a conveyor belt. An increase in the mineralization processes of soil organic nitrogen (spring) produces an acceleration in nitrification processes in the soil (spring and summer). The higher soil nitrate content will be leached into subjacent layers due to the large number of rainfall events (autumn and early winter). The entire process was more intense over the first year due to the influence of the application of organic amendments.  A solute transport simulation was performed in order to evaluate the potential risk of groundwater pollution due to the leaching of nitrogen-soluble forms produced as a result of the organic amendments ( The migration of a groundwater pollutant deposited on the topsoil layer was simulated considering three different scenarios according to the natural variability in pluviometry and possible changes in agricultural practices. Results for solute transport simulations beginning in spring – as for the experimental period – are shown in The results show that organic amendments applied to rainfed crops with an underlying vadose zone similar to the one in the study and under a Mediterranean climate do not apparently pose a pollution risk to groundwater. However, it must be stressed that groundwater pollution may act as a time bomb due to the accumulation of pollutants in the vadose zone through repeated applications ( The assessment of groundwater aggressiveness deriving from the application of organic amendments such as sewage sludge and municipal solid waste to agricultural soils is a complex issue. Several variables such as the seasonal variability in the production of leachable nitrogen forms, water availability for their transport towards the aquifer, and the characteristics of the vadose zone must be considered concurrently. The high variability of the Mediterranean climate represents an additional challenge for the analysis. The type of treatment was the main factor in determining the content of total nitrogen and mineralization processes. Seasonal variations drove the release of soluble inorganic forms of nitrogen and their transformations. Sewage sludge (AES and ANS) provided a higher proportion of soluble nitrogen forms to the soil than MSWC treatment whose residue had a more stable organic matter and therefore slower mineralization. In the study area, natural rainfall patterns do not produce effective aquifer recharge, and pollutants deposited in the topsoil are therefore not leached into groundwater. However, pollutants can accumulate in the vadose zone, and constitute a time bomb leading to future aquifer contamination if water inputs are increased. The risk of groundwater contamination is triggered under medium and long-term irrigation regimes producing a ready leaching of pollutants into the aquifer, both those supplied by recent treatments and those residing in the vadose zone reservoirs. The risk of groundwater pollution is highest when the soluble N forms are released after the application of organic amendment peaks under conditions of reduced residence times in the root zone. Pollutant migration through the root zone is faster when infiltration rates are higher (irrigation or increased rainfall during exceptionally wet periods), particularly when combined with low rates of evapotranspiration. In order to minimise the risk of groundwater contamination, we recommend the use of stable organic amendments (with a more stabilised organic matter), which could produce a lower content of leachable nitrogen forms. Risk is minimised by planting rainfed crops, and particularly by choosing crops with a high demand for nitrogen such as wheat. Applications of organic amendments should be planned to avoid the coincidence of peaks of soluble nitrogen forms with rainfall periods in order to prevent their transport to groundwater and increase their residence time in the root zone. Finally, the use of predictive tools such as flow and transport models for soluble forms is helpful in preventing the risk of contamination. This work is supported by a grant from the