The present study examined wear characteristics of A356/melon shell ash particulate composites. Dry-sliding the stainless steel ball against specimen disc revealed the abrasive wear behavior of the composites under loads of 2 and 5N. The composite showed lower wear rate of 2.182 × 10−4 mm3/Nm at 20 wt% reinforced material under load of 5N. Results showed that wear rate decreased significantly with increasing weight percentage of melon shell ash particles. Microstructural analyses of worn surfaces of the composites reveal evidence of plastic deformation of matrix phase. The wear resistance of A356 increased considerably with percentage reinforcement. In other words, the abrasive mass loss decreased with increasing percentage of reinforcement addition at the both applied loads. The control sample suffered a highest mass loss at 5 N applied load.The speedy advancement in industrial activities, in recent times, has resulted in an increased interest in composites containing low-density and low cost reinforcements. Aluminum matrix composites (AMCs) have unique combination of mechanical, physical and chemical properties which are scarcely attainable with the use of monolithic materials [ The shell was obtained from the melon of species Ingots of A356 alloy was melted by 720 °C in a graphite crucible using an oil fired graphite furnace. After taking off the dross, 5% wt of the preheated melon shell ash was incorporated into the melt at a constant feed rate. The preheat treatment was conducted at 250 °C for 30 min. Simultaneously, mechanical stirrer made up of stainless steel was utilized to ensure thorough mixing. The stirring lasted for 5 min. Afterwards, the mixture was poured into the already prepared sand mould of 30 × 80 mm and allowed to solidify. The same procedure was reiterated for 10, 15 and 20 wt% reinforcement additions. Wear test specimen disc of diameter 25 mm and thickness 5 mm were machined from the as-cast produced composites. The surfaces of each specimen were prepared with 600 grade SiC abrasive papers. A total number of ten specimens were used for the whole experiment, as for each composition two different loads of 2 and 5 N were used. The wear test was carried out on the surface of the specimens using an Anton Paar TRN Tribometer (as per ASTM  From Optical micrographs of the worn surfaces represented above were captured using metallurgical microscope (NJF-120A model). Further characterization of the worn surface of the composite and the alloy was performed through SEM analysis. The SEM (model Phenom ProX) used is a product of Phenom World Eindhoven, Netherlands. SEM images of the worn samples are presented in The wear resistance of the unreinforced A356 alloy has been substantially improved on addition of the melon shell ash particles. It is noted that the weight of the base alloy lost under load of 5 N is 2.5 times greater than that for the alloy reinforced with 20 wt% reinforcement. Wear rate of the base alloy on the other hand, is about 1.23 times higher than that for the alloy reinforced with 20 wt% melon shell ash particles. Thus, composite with 20 wt% reinforcement showed better wear resistance compared with all other composites. This could be recommended to be used in tribological areas of application. Thus, the composite can be exploited as a material for brake rotors, pistons and connecting rods in the automobile applications. M. Abdulwahab: Conceived and designed the experiments. A. I. Gebi: Wrote the paper. R. M. Dodo: Analyzed and interpreted the data. Y. Suleiman and I. Umar: Performed the experiments; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.