In this study, the Geocoat™ technology was used for the extraction of zinc from a mineral concentrate obtained from the Kooshk mine (Yazd, Iran) by a culture dominated by the mesophilic bacterium Acidithiobacillus 
                     ferrooxidans in a packed column bioreactor. A low grade sphalerite ore was used as support for the concentrate coating. During the 100days of leaching pH, Fe3+, Fetotal, microbial population density and zinc extraction were measured. The final zinc extraction from concentrate and low grade support was 97% and 78%, respectively, and it was found that leaching from the support does not proceed significantly before leaching from the coating is completed.Conventional pyrometallurgical methods for the recovery of base metals from sulfide concentrates are subject to increasingly strict environmental regulations, and further limited by high smelting charges and potentially, depending on location, high transport costs. Pressure hydrometallurgical methods have several advantages, including the ability to produce metal directly at the mine site, thus reducing transport costs, closed circuit effluent treatment and reduced impurity penalties ( Chalcopyrite is the only sulfide mineral that does not respond well to leaching by mesophiles ( In this study the Geocoat™ process has been tested using a high grade sphalerite concentrate obtained from Kooshk mine (Yazd, Iran), coated onto the low grade sphalerite rocks from the same source. The main purpose of this study was to determine extraction of metals from the ore support and concentrate coating in response to the presence and absence of pH control. A column of uncoated ore was also run for comparison. All tests were conducted with sphalerite concentrate obtained from the Kooshk mine in Yazd (Iran). XRF analysis of the concentrate indicates a high grade of zinc around 50%, and 33% S as the other major component, furthermore 7.3% Fe, 2.3% Pb, and 2.0% Cu as minor elements. Seventy-five percentage of the concentrate material had a particle size less than 75 For the coating a slurry was prepared by mixing each kg of dry ground concentrate with 400  All experiments were conducted in three similar mini-columns, 6 Solution was fed to the top of the column from a feed container using gravity at a rate of approximately 0.01 Because of the difficulty of taking samples from inside of the column bed during the process, all samples of concentrate and support rocks were picked from the top of the columns. Solid samples were taken after 20, 40, 60, 75, 85 and 100 Prior to inoculation, the columns were rinsed with 1 Ferric and total iron concentrations in the solution were measured by the 5-Sulfo-Salicylic acid spectrophotometric method using a UV–VIS spectrophotometer (Spectronic Technology, model 20D+) ( Microbial counting was done using a Thoma chamber of 0.1  The graph for column 1 indicates the path in which pH would change over the course of leaching without any adjustment, and the close correlation between the curves in   Because of the observed precipitation of jarosite in column 1, the recovery of zinc from rock in this column is quite significantly reduced (45%) in comparison with column 2 (78%) after day 85, indicating the importance of maintaining favorable pH conditions to minimize iron precipitation. Overall Zn extraction in column 1 was therefore only 51% as compared to the 83% achieved in column 2. Iron content (total and ferric) at the beginning and during the leaching process is presented in According to the bioleaching equations (Eqs.  The Geocoat™ technology exploits the advantages of bioleaching in tanks (high recovery rates of metal) with those of heaps (low capital and operating costs). In the present case around 97% of the zinc content of concentrate was leached in column 2, where the pH was kept at 1.5 in the final phase of the leach, which leads to better performance as compared to column 1, where the pH increased to higher levels towards the end. In addition, 45%, 78% and 85% of zinc was leached from the support rocks in columns 1, 2 and control column, respectively, bringing the overall Zn recovery in column 2 to 83% in 100 The findings of this study have some implications on the design of Geocoat™ operations, as the two-stage nature of the process may limit to what extent mineral can be recovered from the support rock. Authors would like to appreciate great attention and help of A. Ebrahimian and F. Ghaderinejad. Geocoat is a trademark process by Geobiotics, LLC, of Lakewood, Colorado, USA.