In many cases nanosized particles are produced not as single primary particles but rather as particle collectives consisting of several primary particles. For many applications the particles must be available in liquid as separately dispersed primary particles or in a certain aggregate size. Especially the micromechanical properties of nanostructured aggregates, for example the breakage energy, have a strong impact on their breaking behaviour and, thus, on the dispersion process. For the determination of the micromechanical properties of nanostructured silica aggregates different measurements with a nanoindenter have been carried out. Comparing the measured micromechanical properties with dispersion results in a stirred media mill, conclusions concerning the influence of particle interactions and solid bridges between the primary particles and the strength of aggregates and their dispersibility can be drawn. The strength of the aggregates can be changed using different primary particle sizes. Generally, the maximum achievable product fineness and the efficiency of the dispersion process increases with decrease in aggregate strength and, thus, increasing primary particle size. With the help of the calculated stress energy distribution in the stirred media mill using the discrete element method and the measured fracture distribution of the aggregates measured via nanoindentation an effective dispersion fraction can be calculated. Comparing the effective dispersion fraction with the dispersion progress in the stirred media mill a linear correlation can be obtained.In the past the importance of industrial mass production of high quality products and specialty chemicals raised rapidly. Depending on the application of nanostructured particles, certain characteristics of the product quality, such as size, morphology, abrasion resistance, specific surface and tendency to agglomeration are important. They depend on the physicochemical properties of the material as well as the technical process control of the production process. Depending on the material system and the process parameters, very small particles, for example nanoparticles, can be produced. In many cases nanosized particles are produced via precipitation or pyrolysis processes not as single primary particles but rather as particle collectives consisting of several primary particles. Typically, in these processes the primary particles are bonded by strong solid bonds. In most applications these particles must be available in liquid as separately dispersed primary particles or in a certain aggregate size. Generally, the influencing factors for breaking up the aggregates depend on the grinding and dispersing process itself, as well as on the properties of the aggregates as shown in previous works ( For the dispersion experiments and measurement of the micromechanical properties via nanoindentation, ideal silica model aggregates with different primary particle sizes between 50 and 400 In this study the micromechanical properties of the silica aggregates were measured by nanoindentation using TriboIndenter® TI 900 from Hysitron Inc. The samples were stressed by a Flat Punch specimen with known material properties and geometry. In this work the deep-sensitive normal force measurement was adopted, where the sample is stressed by a normal force and the resultant force–displacement curve is plotted. In the experiments the measurements were displacement controlled with a total indentation depth of 1000 For a good reproducibility of the micromechanical measurements and in order to avoid measurement artefacts due to different aggregate sizes, silica aggregates between 10 and 15 In order to increase the confidence level and get an impression of the distribution of the micromechanical properties, 40 aggregates of each sample were measured. Due to the small grinding chamber volume of 0.011 Certainly, numeric investigations show, that the stress energy and the number of stress events are not constant throughout the grinding chamber volume ( The annular gap mill “Picoliq” was used for the simulation and the dispersing experiments due to the small grinding chamber volume. For the calculation of the stress energy distribution in this annular gap mill actually a four way DEM–CFD approach would be sufficient to describe the motion and interaction of fluid and grinding media, e. g. the movement of neighbouring grinding beads. Although the grinding chamber of the used annular gap mill is one of the smallest worldwide, the number of grinding beads in the mill is still around 200.000. Moreover, the grinding media package density, Whether the grinding bead motion inside the grinding chamber is fluid or contact controlled, can be investigated by comparing the ratio of the momentum response time of a grinding bead to the time between collisions ( The most important forces acting on a grinding bead inside a dry and wet operated stirred media mill are normal and tangential contact forces, which are calculated by a nonlinear contact model based upon the work of In this study the restitution coefficient for a dry contact of the zirconia grinding media was determined using the experimental drop test set-up presented in In case of wet operation the effects of the flow field and fluid drag forces on the grinding bead motion cannot be neglected ( Besides the additional drag force, the coefficient of restitution, Adopting the Model of Hertz–Mindlin and the Eqs. Typically, in the field of comminution the fracture probability can be described due to Weibull statistics. Thereby, the Weibull statistics is based on the principle of the weakest link in a chain. It gives the probability for fracture of a chain, which consists out of a number of links of a certain strength when the load is applied ( The effect of the micromechanical properties on the dispersion efficiency was studied using the nanostructured silica with different primary particle sizes and, thus, different particle–particle interactions in the aggregates. For the dispersing experiments the stirred media mill Picoliq was operated at the mentioned constant operating parameters. Moreover, the measurement data in In most cases the estimation of the stress intensity distribution in stirred media mills is described by different authors by varying stress models ( Weighing the breakage energy, This means that based on the micromechanical measurements of the breakage energies of aggregates and the stress energy distribution of a stirred media mill, determined for example by DEM-simulation, the effective number of stress events per time and, thus, the efficiency of the dispersing process can be determined. The application properties of nanoparticles are a function of the physicochemical properties of the nanostructured material. In most applications the particles must be available in liquid as separately dispersed primary particles or in a certain aggregate size. Thereby, the success of a dispersion process strongly depends on the micromechanical properties of the nanostructured aggregates. These micromechanical properties can be measured by nanoindentation. In this study sol–gel produced silica aggregates with varying primary particle size were used for dispersion experiments and measurement of the micromechanical properties. The measurement of the micromechanical properties such as breakage force as well as deformation and fracture energy give informations about the product properties, e.g. the efficiency of the dispersion process of nanostructured aggregates. An increase in the number of the solid bonds in the aggregates by decreasing the primary particle size leads to an increase of the fracture energy. By comparing the breakage energy distribution measured via nanoindentation with the stress energy distribution of the stirred media mill simulated via the discrete element method, an effective dispersion fraction can be calculated. This effective dispersion fraction is a measure for the efficiency of the dispersion process and can well be correlated to the effective number of stress events at the start of the process. Especially, the dispersion progress at the beginning of the dispersion process, which is a function of the stress energy distribution of the mill and the breakage energy distribution of the aggregates, can be described by a linear correlation with the calculated effective dispersion fraction. At constant operating parameters the stress energy distribution of the stirred media mill stays constant and the dispersion progress is only described as a function of the breakage energy distribution of the aggregates. Therefore, the stress energy distribution in a stirred media mill simulated via DEM and the measurement of the micromechanical properties via nanoindentation can be quantitatively correlated with the dispersion process.  coefficient of the fit function of the flow field (m/s) coefficient of the fit function of the flow field (dimensionless) coefficient of the fit function of the flow field (s/m) coefficient of the fit function of the flow field (s coefficient of the fit function of the flow field (s coefficient of the fit function of the flow field (s projected area (m drag coefficient (dimensionless) mass concentration (dimensionless) volume concentration (dimensionless) diameter of a single grinding bead (μm) median grinding media diameter (μm) effective dispersion fraction (dimensionless) coefficient of restitution (dimensionless) reduced coefficient of restitution (dimensionless) Young′s modulus (N/m equivalent Young′s modulus (N/m fracture energy (pJ) minimum fracture energy (pJ) kinetic energy of the grinding media (J) effective stress number (dimensionless) indentation force (μN) drag force (N) maximum indentation force (μN) spring force in normal direction (N) damping force in normal direction (N) spring force in tangential direction (N) damping force in tangential direction (N) force induced by rolling friction (N) shear modulus (GPa) displacement (nm) dispersion kinetic parameter (s) product particle mass (kg) equivalent mass of an grinding bead (kg) average mass of a grinding bead (kg) number density of grinding beads (dimensionless) number of particles (dimensionless) particle size distribution (1/μm) aggregate breakage energy distribution (dimensionless) stress energy distribution of the mill (dimensionless) number of stress events (dimensionless) distance from the centre of the mill (m) grinding bead radius (m) equivalent grinding bead radius (m) normal, tangential stiffness (N/mm stress energy of the grinding media (J) stress energy of the mill (pJ) maximum stress energy of the mill (pJ) stress frequency (1/s) stress number of a dispersion process (dimensionless) stress intensity in the stirred media mill (Nm) Stokes number (dimensionless) dispersion time [s] temperature [°C] flow field in the annular gap mill [m/s] normal component of the velocity of grinding bead normal component of the velocity of grinding bead relative velocity between grinding bead and fluid (m/s) relative velocity between two grinding beads (m/s) tip speed (m/s) suspension volume (m product particle size (μm), (nm) aggregate/aggregate size of the feed particles (μm) minimum achievable end-particle size (nm) length ratio—force starts to influence the grinding bead velocity (dimensionless) damping coefficient (dimensionless) porosity of the grinding media (dimensionless) normal overlap (m) tangential overlap (m) density of a single grinding bead (kg/m filling ratio of the grinding media (dimensionless) fluid density (kg/m grinding media density (kg/m aggregate/agglomerate strength (n/m fluid viscosity (mPa static friction factor (dimensionless) rolling friction factor (dimensionless) Poisson ratio (dimensionless) average time between bead–bead collisions (s) momentum response time (s) angular velocity of a grinding bead (rad/s) The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the