Foam separation of 137Cs+ radionuclides coprecipitated with cadmium(II) hexacyanoferrate (137Cs-CdHCF) particles is investigated in this study using two types of surfactants. The effects of several coprecipitation and foam separation parameters on the recovery percentage and volume reduction of cesium radionuclides are evaluated. The cationic surfactant, hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (HDTMA), and the anionic one, sodium lauryl sulfate (NaLS), had the ability to float 137Cs-CdHCF particles at [Cd(II)]/[KHCF] molar ratios of 0.5 and 2, respectively. Recovery percentages of 92% and 88% are obtained in the pH range of 4.7–8.3 and 3.8–9.5 using HDTMA and NaLS, respectively. The addition of stable cesium during the coprecipitation process improved the recovery percentage (98% for HDTMA and 96% for NaLS). The recovery process is very fast where induction time of <15min (for coprecipitation process) and <5min (for foam separation process) are sufficient for efficient recovery of cesium radionuclides. The proposed strategy succeeded to efficiently preconcentrate cesium radionuclides from surface water where recovery percentage more than 99% with high volume reduction is achieved using HDTMA. Comparison of the present combined process with previously reported preconcentration processes proved its applicability for preconcentration of cesium radionuclides from water systems. Coprecipitate flotation is a process which firstly involves the coprecipitation of the ionic species by the addition of a suitable agent. Adsorption of a surface-active agent (called a collector), being added to the suspension, of opposite charge to that of the precipitate’s surface renders the particles hydrophobic and thus floatable. The collector-coprecipitate hydrophobic product, therefore, tends to preferentially concentrate at the liquid-air interface generated by bubbling air into the suspension. The continuous movement of the bubbles upward separates the collector-coprecipitate product in the foam layer at the surface of the liquid phase ( The current study deals with recovery and preconcentration of All chemicals utilized throughout the current study were of analytical reagent grade and were used without additional purification. Cadmium chloride hydrate (CdCl The recovery and preconcentration experiments employed in the current study for cesium radionuclides are shown in the diagrammatic sketch represented in The solid particles formed during the coprecipitation process were separated through a 0.22 Prior The XRD pattern of Cs-CdHCF particles ( Depending on the [M(II)]/[KHCF] molar ration, it is found that insoluble metal hexacyanoferrates of diverse compositions are produced which possess different affinity for cesium ions ( Regarding the data given in Unadsorbed [Fe(CN) Such attachments suppressed the adsorption of collectors onto The influence of the concentration of two types of surfactant, namely, hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (HDTMA, a cationic collector) and sodium lauryl sulfate (NaLS, an anionic one), on the recovery percentage and volume reduction of cesium radionuclides coprecipitated with cadmium(II) hexacyanoferrate ( For foam separation processes, it is well-recognized that the collector concentration must be sufficient to produce stable and persistent foam which has the ability to maintain the solid particles, to be floated, atop of the liquid phase ( The schematic representation of The pH of the solution is known to be the most critical variable in foam separation processes particularly precipitate and coprecipitate ones. This is because its variation: (i) determines the sign and magnitude of the charge on the precipitate’s surface, (ii) affects the aqueous chemistry of the colligend, (iii) affects the dissociation of the surfactant and (iv) has an influence on foam stability ( According to  Generally, the concentration of Na The effect of stable cesium concentration, in the range 1 For precipitation and coprecipitation reactions, the induction time (duration of agitation) of the formed particles is found to have a positive impact on their foam separation ( The volume reduction data given in The effect of air flow-rate, in the range 8 – 55 The aforementioned results show the effectiveness of the present combined processes for recovery and preconcentration of cesium radionuclides from distilled water. Herein, the work is extended to evaluate the performance of coprecipitation and foam separation combined processes proposed in this study for real application. For this purpose, surface water sample (contains: 34 From radioanalytical point of view, the effectiveness of a preconcentration process depends on its capability to segregate the analyte’s solution into a concentrate containing most the radionuclides whose volume is as small as possible. Therefore, our efforts have been devoted to achieve not only high recovery percentage but also high volume reduction. Applying the optimum conditions for recovery of cesium radionuclides from distilled water ([Cd(II)]/[KHCF] molar ratios of 0.5 and 2 for 4 To further evaluate the efficiency of the combined process employed in the current study for preconcentration of cesium radionuclides from aqueous solutions, the data obtained in A simple, rapid, low-cost and efficient preconcentration process for cesium radionuclides is developed in the current study. Recovery and prconcentration of