A new method for preparing heterogeneous ion-exchange membranes was developed. It was found that application of an ac electric field during curing of the polymeric matrix resulted in the agglomeration of the ion-exchange particles in long linear chains extending across the membrane. As a result, the percolation threshold for ion conductance was reduced to values more than three to four times smaller than those for membranes with randomly distributed particles. The effect of ordering the particles on the membrane conductivity, swelling properties, ion-exchange capacity and permselectivity is studied. The advantages of the ordered membranes in electrodialysis and fuel cell applications are discussed.
                  The experimental and theoretical aspects of this work were inspired through discussions with Prof. Ora Kedem.Ion-exchange membranes are used in electrodialysis (ED) as ion-selective membranes and in power sources (such as fuel cells) as proton conductive separators. Basically, two types of ion-exchange membrane are available for use in ED: (1) homogeneous membranes, which are composed of cross-linked polymers having ion-exchange groups bound to the polymer backbone; and (2) heterogeneous membranes, which consist of neutral polymer matrix, such as polyethylene, randomly filled with micron-sized ion-exchange particles. Both membrane types are often reinforced with a net of polymeric material, such as polyamide or polyester. A heterogeneous membrane becomes an ion-conductive permselective membrane when the so-called percolation concentration In power sources, particularly fuel cells, the Nafion™ membrane is widely used because of its remarkable proton conductance (0.15 In the current study, we developed a new method for preparing heterogeneous ion-exchange membranes with reduced amounts of ion-exchange material but nevertheless with high ionic conductivities. This was achieved by applying an electric field during the manufacturing of the membranes. This procedure served to order the ion-exchange particles into highly conductive chains between the membrane faces. It is expected that the consequent reduction in the percolation threshold will enable the above-mentioned drawbacks, with respect to both ED and fuel cell applications, to be overcome. Interest in ordered suspended particles in liquids or solids has increased throughout the years, not just from a scientific point of view, but also because of the many new intriguing technological advances that can be made possible by ordering particles by means of an external force (e.g. electric or magnetic). In the case when an electric field is applied, it is necessary to distinguish between the mechanisms that govern the action of uniform and nonuniform electric fields on the suspended particles. When particles suspended in a non-conducting fluid (volume fraction in the range of 0.01–0.3) are exposed to a strong uniform ac electric field (typically, 1−100 According to Parthasarathy and Klingenberg It should be emphasized that The anisotropic character of As noted above, in the point-dipole model it was assumed that neither the particles nor the fluid are electrically conductive. In the case in which these phases are conductive, the Maxwell–Wagner approach In this case the polarizability When the particles also carry surface conductivity (a case that is relevant to this work, since ion-exchange particles are both bulk and surface conductive), the polarization and inter-particle interactions may also be described by the Maxwell–Wagner model, but the conductivity of the particle should be replaced by The migration of particles that are suspended in a fluid with a low dielectric constant under the influence of a strong spatially nonuniform ac electric field (>10  The models discussed above are the most basic models describing the interactions between particles under the influence of an electric field. They do not take into account the mutual effects of neighboring particles on the polarizability or the contributions of Brownian and Stokesian effects. In addition, they do not relate to time-dependent mechanisms, for example, the approach to phase separation (more comprehensive discussions may be found in The electric field should be as uniform as possible, otherwise only a fraction of the particles will be arranged in chains. The polarizability Particles with high dielectric constants will act best at high frequencies, while those that are electrically conductive will be effective in a lower frequency range. In addition, the specific gravity of the particles and the surrounding fluid as well as the viscosity of the fluid should be selected carefully so as to prevent precipitation while still allowing the particles to approach one another with reasonable velocity. The polymeric matrix and the ion-exchange phase of the model membranes were prepared as follows: The continuous matrix consisted of two-component RTV silicon rubber (Polymer Gvulot, Israel). Upon mixing of the two components, a clear liquid with a viscosity of 1600 Weighed quantities of the resin and the uncured rubber polymeric matrix were first mixed thoroughly and then subjected to a vacuum at the ambient temperature for 10 The mixture was then transferred into a circular mold compartment in the bottom half of an electrode cell illustrated in A 50-Hz ac voltage was applied to the cell by means of a variable transformer to form an electric field of 200–1400 The same procedure was followed, but without application of an electric field, for the preparation of non-ordered membranes. Membranes were equilibrated in 0.1–1 Water content was determined in deionized water and 0.1 and 2 Some of the above-mentioned parameters were compared with those of commercial heterogeneous cation-exchange membranes, such as CMH (Mega, Czech Republic) and MK-40 (NPO Plastmassy, Russia). Examination of particle motion and ordering under the influence of the electric field was conducted under an optical microscope in a transparent cell with two platinum strips as electrodes. The ion-exchange resin particles were observed in suspension in the clear polymeric component of the RTV, namely, no curing was initiated while watching the particles. The effect of the electric field on the arrangement of the spherical particles was followed under a light microscope. The photographs presented in The dramatic effect of ordering the ion-exchange resin particles on the specific conductivity of the membranes is evident from It should be noted that the specific conductivity for the ordered membranes shown in The effect of the electric field on the specific conductivity of the membranes at constant resin content is shown in The maximum It is clear that the conductivity figures calculated above do not reflect the actual values, since in expression (3) it was assumed that the electrical contact between the particles is perfect, and that the electrical contact is made over a cross-section area of an equivalent cylinder that is much larger than that between two spherical particles. In addition, there are several experimental factors that prevent us from reaching higher conductivities. The approach to preparing ordered chains is dictated by the curing process of the polymeric matrix, namely, it is limited by the increasing viscosity of the matrix with time, which impedes the motion of the particles towards each other. These conditions do not necessarily allow, at a prescribed electric field, sufficient time for the production of the maximum number of ordered particles or the maximum chain length (i.e. for the chains to extend between the two membrane faces, giving rise to optimal conductivity). In addition, the above-described conditions do not facilitate direct contact between the particles. These drawbacks can be overcome by proper choice of matrix and ion-exchange particles. However, optimizing the membranes with respect to construction materials is beyond the scope of the work discussed herein. It should be emphasized that an isolated incomplete chain growing from one face of the membrane may not necessarily contribute to the membrane conductivity, but, as discussed below, it can contribute to the ion-exchange capacity. In A more detailed comparison between the ordered and the non-ordered membranes with respect to water content is shown in The differences in water content between the ordered and non-ordered membranes at moderate electrolyte concentrations is more pronounced when the number of grams of water per milliequivalent of sulfonic groups is given as a function of the resin content equilibrated in 0.1 In Ion-exchange capacities of the ordered and non-ordered membranes and the corresponding calculated capacities of the resin particles within the membranes are presented in The situation described above is evidently in conflict with the finding that water content (per meq. of ion exchange capacity) is not significantly reduced when the resin content is decreased, and, as shown in Heterogeneous ion-exchange membranes with highly ordered ion-exchange particles are potentially superior to the traditional membranes with randomly dispersed particles due to the reduced amount of ion-exchange material required for attaining the desired ionic conductivity. It was shown that the lower amount of ion-exchange material results in significant reduction of water concentration within the membrane though the conductivity is the same or even improved. Ordered membranes are thus expected to be more shape stable, with good conductivities at lower water content, and with improved ionic versus nonionic permeability. These features are important for both ED and fuel cell applications.