Comparative dry grinding tests were conducted for two grinding flowsheet options using commercial aggregate as feed material: Option A, using a high pressure grinding roll (HPGR) in closed circuit with air classification, and Option B, using HPGR in closed circuit with a 2.36mm screen, followed by a locked-cycle Bond test. Bond tests were also carried out on standard crushed feed passing 3.35mm and 2.36mm for comparison. The feed for the tests was screened and crushed to pass 10mm. The air classifier produced a fine product with an 80% passing size (P
                     80) of around 50μm. In order to maintain comparability, the Bond tests were carried out using a 75μm closing screen, producing a final product with a P
                     80 of 57μm. In all tests, the power consumption of the HPGR, Bond mill and air classifier were recorded directly using a power meter, while the Bond mill power consumption was also calculated using Bond’s third law and other published methods.
                  Testing determined that the specific energy consumption of the Option B circuit was 41.9% greater than Option A when evaluated using power logging, or 26.2% greater when calculated using Bond’s law. Option A required 20.8–29.5% less energy per tonne of ore processed than Option B, a conservative estimate due to the finer grind size achieved. Further Bond tests showed that the work indices of standard crushed −3.35mm and −2.36mm feed were similar (15.0 and 15.3kWh/t, respectively), while the HPGR crushed −2.36mm feed produced a lower work index of 14.0kWh/t. These results agree with observations by other workers that HPGR renders a sample more amenable to comminution, most likely due to the introduction of micro-cracks.Traditionally, the majority of mineral processing operations conduct ore handling and comminution steps by a combination of dry crushing moist ore, followed by further wet grinding and classification stages to reach a target grind size. In the current mining climate however, with the rising number of operations in areas with poor power handling or capacity and water scarcity, such as in North Western Australia, the Andes and the Sahara Desert, exploration and consideration of dry grinding is growing. With issues such as climate change, green house gas emissions and carbon footprint gaining priority status in public, coupled with rising electricity costs in response to high fuel prices and electric power shortages in countries such as Africa and Chile, the mining industry is now considering dry grinding options more readily. Dry grinding has been utilised in the cement industry for many years for comminution of limestone, slag and clinker, firstly through ball and rod mills, and in recent decades using high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR). Circuits closed with air classification have enabled the use of HPGR in the cement industry for reliable pre-mill grind or final product grind, reducing power and steel usage cost, and increasing capacity, while operating to make high quality product as fine as 25 The current HPGR comprises two motor driven counter rotating rolls, one fixed, and one acting against hydraulic cylinders connected to pressurised nitrogen accumulators. Rock is choke-fed to the roll gap, with nip and pre-breakage occurring for particles larger than the gap by single particle comminution, and smaller particles forming a compressed bed between the rolls enabling more efficient bed breakage mechanics ( Since the introduction of HPGR to the cement industry in 1985, studies and applications of HPGR to hard rock operations have become increasingly common. Several notable hard rock installations include Cerro Verde McMoRan Copper–Molybdenum in Peru, Mogalakwena Anglo American Platinum in South Africa, Boddington Newmont Copper–Gold in Australia, Grasberg McMoRan Copper–Gold in Indonesia, CVRD Iron Ore in Brazil, Kudremukh Iron Ore in India, El Brocal Lead–Zinc and Copper in Peru, CAP Minería Iron Ore in Chile, and SNIM Iron Ore in Mauritania ( In dry grinding applications, closed circuit HPGR utilises screens or air classification for dry classification and recirculation. While dry screens are only applicable for coarse product sizes due to the issue of agglomeration, air classification may be applied for Two HPGR flowsheet options were tested in the present study using commercial aggregate material, screened and crushed to pass 10 Experimental procedures include feed preparation, calibration tests for HPGR and air classifier equipment, and comparative grinding tests. The 500 A KHD rotating wheel air classifier was utilised in this test work, comprising a feeder hopper and motor, product storage and dust cyclone as shown in Grinding tests were carried out using a fully instrumented Krupp Polysius HPGR unit as shown in For each grinding cycle, 20 For each grinding cycle, 30 Bond ball mill locked cycle tests were carried out at a closing screen size of 75 The mill energy input per revolution was calculated from Eq. According to The specific grinding energy of a 2.44 Comparable results to Eq. The results of the Option A test (locked cycle HPGR closed with air classifier) are summarised in The air classifier partition curve for the Option A test is shown in The air classifier feed distribution (actual and calculated) is shown in The results of the Option B test (locked cycle HPGR closed with a 2.36  In addition to the Bond test described for Option B above, which used −2.36 It can be seen in The results in The aim of this work was to investigate the comparative energy use of HPGR with air classification and HPGR with screening and subsequent ball milling to produce a relatively fine product from a 10 These findings are in line with other published results ( This work was supported by Metso Process Technology and Innovation in collaboration with the CSIRO Minerals Down Under flagship. The authors thank Venkata Nunna (CSIRO) for his valuable assistance, Tirsha Raynlyn (CSIRO), Tugs Tsedenbaljie (Metso) and Jeff Douglas (CSIRO) for assistance with the experimental work, and Ralph Holmes and Warren Bruckard (CSIRO) for proof reading of the draft manuscript.