Undetected faults in heavy earth moving machineries (HEMMs) are linked with high maintenance cost and downtime losses. Draglines are capital intensive HEMMs used in surface coal mines for stripping overburden. It is revealed from the annual maintenance worksheet of three draglines that drag system failures alone contributed to 49% of the total downtime of draglines. However, inclusion of an effective fault prediction methodology in the preventive maintenance policy of the drag system is expected to reduce most of these failures and downtimes of the dragline. This paper demonstrates a data-driven approach for predicting faults in drag system using multilayer perceptron (MLP) in artificial neural network (ANN) using past two years cause, symptom, and fault data recorded through the sensor, logbook, and visual inspection. A total of 452 data when symptoms exceeded the threshold limit was observed; out of which there were 199 faults that led to 16 failures in the drag system, and these data have been transformed to categorical data. Two ANN models have been developed to understand the fault occurrence process using seven causes, seven symptoms and five fault parameters of drag system. The prediction accuracy of symptoms using the cause was 94.2% and that of fault using symptom was 97.1%. The sensitivity of causes and symptoms were ranked for individual faults that can help the maintenance engineer to predict the faults and to make the sequence of preventive maintenance action plan in order to minimize the unwanted downtime and maintenance cost of the dragline.The occurrence of unwanted fault and failure of heavy earth moving machinery (HEMM) witnessed the loss of production, increased downtime, and decreased safety over the years. However, preventive maintenance policies can address these faults and failures in advance to reduce the downtime of equipment/machine, and subsequently help to reduce their maintenance costs When failure occurs in the drag system, corrective maintenance strategies are used to take necessary repair or replacement actions as quickly and as precisely as possible to reestablish a running system. The maintenance crew starts the repair action without following any particular sequence, and it takes more time to make a decision and to complete the repair depending on the fault or symptom or cause. In this paper, symptom to fault and cause to symptom models have been studied to make the necessary sequence of preventive maintenance action based on the previous fault/symptom. The sequence of occurrence of failure in the drag system is interlinked to its cause, symptom and fault as presented in Since the relationship between cause to symptom and symptom to fault follow nonlinear relationship, artificial neural network (ANN) models are preferred for establishing the relationship Dragline is a capital intensive HEMM, and the capital cost of considered dragline was 26,229,766 USD Consequently, two ANN models are used to predict the occurrence of fault. The first model is based on cause and symptom, and the second one is based on symptom and fault. The cause to symptom ANN model is used to predict the symptom to prioritize the sequence of responsible root causes that can help the maintenance engineer to take the necessary maintenance action to eliminate the root causes to avoid the occurrence of symptom as well as fault. On the other hand, the symptom to fault ANN model is used to predict the possible occurrence of faults in drag system whenever the symptom exceeds the threshold limit. This fault prediction is expected to aid in maintenance planning to avoid catastrophic failures of the dragline. Therefore the combination of both models can be used in real-time application to predict the occurrence of fault and minimize the downtime of dragline. ANN model consists of a large number of interconnected artificial neurons and their problem-solving capabilities to learning multiple input parameters and their associated output parameters. The ANN model consists of mainly three attributes: architecture or topology, transfer or activation function, and learning or training algorithm The knowledge that the network acquires during learning is implicitly encoded in its numeric weights and bias values. Each layer of the neural network acts For the development of ANN models, data of the drag system was collected and these data was divided into two categories (0 or 1) based on their threshold limit values. The data were assigned randomly to the training, testing, and holdout subsets. The training data subset of the ANN model is used to build the ANN model architecture and adjust the weights and biases. The testing, data subset is used for calculating the errors, and holdout data subset is used to validate the ANN model. Detail description of the methodology to optimize the ANN model for fault prediction and to adopt it in the preventive maintenance policy of dragline is shown in In the ANN model, initially the number of hidden layers and number of hidden neurons in each layer were selected based on rule of thumb The ANN model is used to perform the classification of target value using softmax activation for the output layer and cross-entropy error function to predict the accuracy of the model. Cross-entropy error is directly proportional to the difference between the predicted and actual output values of the ANN model. The cross-entropy loss increases as the predicted probability diverge from the actual level. Cross-entropy error (E) in the backpropagation algorithm to reduce stagnation is calculated using Eq. A walking dragline (model: WD 24/96 made by Heavy Engineering Corporation (HEC) – Ransom & Rapier, having bucket capacity 24 m In this study, the drag system is studied for fault prediction. In the drag system, three stages of power conversion is done. The main electrical power is fed to the synchronous motor (1750 HP) which is mechanically coupled with DC generators known as motor-generator (MG) set. The output of the generator connects the input of the drag motor (DC motor) and it is powered via a Ward Leonard system For certain parameters of drag system, the threshold limit values are already defined and inbuilt in the sensor during manufacturing of machine (e.g., current feedback, voltage feedback, temperature feedback, lubrication level). These parameters are continuously recorded and displayed on the screen, and their threshold limit values are shown in Similarly, the threshold values of vibration amplitudes of the drag system are 0.076 mm (maximum possible vibration amplitude during normal operation) horizontally or vertically defined by the dragline manufacturer, and it is continuously recorded through the inbuilt sensor In this paper, ANN models are constructed to make the relationship between cause to symptom and symptom to fault for the drag system of dragline that includes seven major cause parameters, seven symptom parameters, and five major fault parameters. Seven major cause parameters are bearing jam and loose bolt (BLB), improper control (IC), overloading (OL), loose connection (LC), and overheating (OH), drum and coupling (DC), unidentified cause (UC). Seven symptom parameters are current feedback (CF), voltage feedback (VF), vibration and unwanted sound (VUS), lubrication level (LL), temperature feedback (TF), sparking (Sp), and unidentified symptom (US). Four major fault parameters are bearing or bolt failure (BBF), drive control problem (DCP), starting or breaking problem (SBP), insulation damage (ID) and unidentified fault (UF). The detail description of the relationships between the occurrence of cause, symptom and fault and corresponding sequence of maintenace actions are described in Sections 5.2.1 and 5.2.2. These five major fault types identified in the drag system are responsible for drag system failure and contribute significantly towards downtime of the dragline. It can be understood that if the failed bearing or bolt is not maintained within a designated time, they may lead to the failure of the shaft, winding, or failure of the entire drag system. If the bearing or bolt is cracked, it should be replaced as soon as possible to prevent the occurrence of a destructive failure of the components that are connected in series such as gear and shaft as it can damage the rotor as well as stator of the drag motor. Inappropriate drive control leads to improper operation of the bucket during forward and backward rotation, and it adversely affects productivity. Starting or braking fault increase the unwanted downtime (loss of production) reduces the safety of operation and its occurs mainly due to improper controlling, battery discharge, fluctuation of electrical supply, and the braking problem mainly occurs due to brake shoe, hydraulic pressure. Increase in temperature, or current, or short-circuiting of drag system cause insulation damage and when they are not isolated within the desired time, can cause damage of the whole winding of the system. Some of the faults are unknown and occur rarely or occur after the occurrence of some other fault or occur due to the impact of other sub-components of the dragline; hence, it is considered as the unidentified fault. Therefore, identification of these faults in drag system with their root causes or preceding symptoms or both is expected to provide sufficient information for the maintenance engineer to prepare the preventive maintenance policy and sequence of action to prevent the major failure of the drag system and reduce the downtime. The historical maintenance worksheet data, sensor data, failure data, and experts' opinion of the dragline were collected from a surface coal mine located in Northern India. These data were collected from 9th May 2014 to 22nd September 2016 for a dragline starting from its commissioning till 7267:30 EHMR (Engine Hourly Machine Rate) and data were recorded when one or more symptoms cross the threshold limit. When symptom crosses the threshold limit, corresponding occurrence of fault and source of fault (i.e. cause) were recorded. Some of the faults occurred without giving any symptoms were also considered in this study, and these were named as ‘unidentified symptoms’. There were 452 symptoms those crossed the threshold limit; and out of which there were 199 faults in the drag system. Out of 452 symptoms, 14 were unidentified symptoms and they occurred mainly due to the effect of other subsystems of the dragline on drag system (e.g., sudden fall of the bucket or boom that affects the drag system). Sixteen failures in drag system were also realized from these 199 faults. Data collected from the sensor, logbook, and visual inspection have been transformed in the form of categorical data. As mentioned earlier, the collected data is then categorized into two categories (i.e., 1 and 0): while '1′ refers the value exceeds the threshold limit, and '0′ signifies that the parameter lies within the threshold limit. These categorical data are presented in The first data was collected when EHMR was 46:00. Due to overheating of the drive control system, there was a sudden increase in temperature that was warned through the alarm and the fault was of degraded type. Therefore the dragline continued to operate. The maintenance was done during potential to failure (P-F) interval to minimize downtime and maintenance cost. The data retrieval from the maintenance record, as mentioned in Categorization of symptom data, TF = 1, remaining symptoms are within the threshold limit, hence CF = VF = VUS = LL = Sp = US = 0 Categorization of cause data, OH = 1 which was identified during maintenance and remaining causes were not observed during maintenance. Hence BLB = IC = LC = OL = DC = UC = 0 Occurrence of fault DCP = 1, therefore remaining faults did not occur in this case and the fault was identified during maintenance. Hence BBF = SBP = ID = UF = 0. Referring to the second data of The MLP module of ANN models was used to build the neural network model and to test its accuracy and sensitivity of each parameter using SPSS v.19 statistical package The predicted pseudo-probabilities of ANN model of cause to symptom is depicted in In the observed categories of ‘0′ in the box plot represents predicted pseudo-probability below the 0.5 marks is correct prediction and above the 0.5 marks represent the incorrect prediction. In the output categories of ‘1′ represents predicted pseudo-probability above the 0.5 marks is correct prediction and below the 0.5 marks represent the incorrect prediction. The number of correct and incorrect prediction of the output of three different data subset such as training, testing and holdout data subset of cause to symptom model is presented in The cause and symptom relationship can be used to identify the sequence of causes, when any symptom occurs in the drag system. In the case study, for instance, when the symptom vibration and unwanted sound exceeds the threshold limit and the causes are unknown, then the sequence of causes can be identified based on the sensitivity analysis. It is observed that the most effective parameter symptom vibration and unwanted is drum and coupling having weightage 34.4%, hence it should be checked first (refer Similarly, when the symptom, current feedback crosses the threshold limit, it observed that most effective cause is overloading having weightage 18.7%, hence it should be verified for the overloading. The second most effective parameter is overheating (weightage 18.5%). It occurs mainly due to improper lubrication on bearing hence check the lubrication of the bearing if it is found to be in good condition then go to the third most effective cause and so on depending on the weightage of cause for every symptom in the drag system. The average time to check one parameter ranges from 5 to 20 min as reported by the dragline maintenance staff. In the proper sequence, most of the responsible causes are identified after one or two steps, so it can reduce the downtime and it can improve the production and safety of the dragline and also take the preventive maintenance action before its conversion into the fault. The predicted pseudo-probabilities of ANN model of symptom to fault model is shown in The symptom to fault relationship is used to identify and prioritize the sequence of symptoms that influences the fault, when any fault in the drag system is identified. In the case study, for instance, when the fault bolt or bearing failure is identified, then a sequence to identify the symptom can be made (refer Failure of drag system contributes to significant downtime losses for the dragline, but prediction of faults through symptoms and causes can reduce the failure frequency and downtime losses; simultaneously increasing its safety, reliability and productivity. The ANN model is used to predict five major types of faults observed in drag system and the model accuracy reveals its use for fault prediction. The sensitivity analysis for the occurrence of symptom identified how sensitive is the model for the change of each cause and ranked the causes based on their percentage of contribution. Based on the observed symptoms, the maintenance engineer can make effective preventive maintenance action plan of the cause. Similar observations were recorded from the symptom to fault relationship to prevent the fault before the failure of dragline. Therefore the accuracy of predicted symptoms/faults and prioritisation of the causes/symptoms can help the maintenance engineer in preparing a real-time monitoring action plan of the drag system so as to minimize the failure frequency and downtime of dragline. The model can be extended to remaining major subsystems of dragline like hoist, propel, and swing to make an effective maintenance plan to reduce failure frequency and increase its productivity. The methodology can equally be applicable to sophisticated and capital-intensive HEMMs used in mines and other industries. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The authors thankfully acknowledge the cooperation of the mine management during data collection. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: