In this work the kinetics of a number of sulfide-oxidizing nitrate-reducing (SO-NR) cultures acclimated and not acclimated to nitrite were characterized. Anoxic respirometry coupled to kinetic modeling of respirometric profiles was the methodology used to study the two-step denitrification associated to thiosulfate oxidation. Autotrophic denitritation was initially studied in a non-acclimated SO-NR culture to confirm that nitrite reduction kinetics could be described through a Haldane-type equation. Afterwards, a kinetic model describing the two-step denitrification (NO3
                     −
                     →NO2
                     −
                     →N2) was calibrated and validated through the estimation of several kinetic parameters from the fitting of experimental respirometric profiles obtained using either nitrate or nitrite as electron acceptors for both acclimated and non-acclimated biomass. The model proposed was a multi-substrate model that considered all the species implicated in the process as well as the stoichiometry associated particularly to the biomass studied in this work. A comparison between the kinetic parameters with the biomass acclimated and non-acclimated to nitrite revealed a 7-fold increase of the Haldane nitrite inhibition constant in the acclimated biomass with respect to the non-acclimated while the nitrite half-saturation constant and the maximum specific growth rate remained almost unchanged. The Fisher Information Matrix method was used to obtain the confidence intervals and also to evaluate the sensitivity and the identifiability in model calibration of each kinetic parameter estimated.Different techniques have been developed to study the biodegradation characteristics of microbial cultures Kinetic characterization of autotrophic denitrifying biomass through respirometry has already been reported for suspended cultures obtained from wastewater treatment processes Some authors have used single-substrate kinetic models taking into account microbial growth rates associated only to a single pollutant biodegradation (Monod, Haldane and other kinetic equations) Previous works have reported a methodology and an experimental setup of the anoxic respirometer used in this study. In addition, denitrification and thiosulfate oxidation rates of a SO-NR biomass from an anoxic biotrickling filter have been obtained as well as the stoichiometry of the two-step denitrification process has been solved The SO-NR biomass used in this work was obtained from an anoxic biogas desulfurizing biotrickling filter (BTF) at different operation times (175 Two sets of respirometric tests were performed with the biomass cultured in the CSTR in order to evaluate the denitrification kinetics associated to thiosulfate oxidation ( To obtain the respirometric profiles a certain volume of the biomass cultured in the CSTR was previously washed and poured into the respirometer. Subsequently, known pulses of thiosulfate, nitrate and nitrite were added to the respirometer after overcoming both the endogenous and the wake up phases. The continuous sampling of the system allowed monitoring the concentration of the species involved in the process, which enables the estimation of the corresponding kinetic parameters by modeling the respirometric profiles. The protocol used for biomass preparation prior to the anoxic respirometric tests as well as the set up of the respirometer and the procedure to obtain the respirometric profiles were previously optimized and properly described in Mora et al. Nitrite (NO According to literature Stoichiometric coefficients are necessary to properly characterize the kinetics of a microbial population since biomass growth yields have a strong influence on the relation between all the species implicated in the biological process. In this study the two-step denitrification stoichiometry used (Eqs. Nitrogen gas was the final product considered from nitrite reduction (Eq. In addition to the Haldane-type term for nitrite, the set of differential equations describing mass balances for nitrite and thiosulfate consumption, sulfate production and biomass growth (Eqs. The denitrification process has been previously characterized through several kinetic equations combining non-competitive inhibition between denitrification intermediates and simple Monod equations Maximum specific growth rates, half-saturation constants and inhibition constants were estimated as well as the respirometric profiles were simulated by means of MATLAB 7.7 (Mathworks, Natik, MA). The differential equations presented above (Eqs. The confidence intervals of the estimated parameters were assessed through the Fisher Information Matrix mathematical method. The FIM summarizes the quantity and quality of information obtained in each experiment because it considers the output sensitivity functions and the measurement errors of an experimental data (i.e. accuracy of an experiment). When white measurement noise (i.e. independent and normally distributed with zero mean) and no model mismatch, no data autocorrelation and uncorrelated errors can be assumed, the inverse of the FIM provides the lower bound of the parameter estimation error covariance matrix, which can be used for assessing the estimation uncertainty of the optimal estimated parameters. Moreover, since output sensitivities of parameters are calculated using a model, the FIM also depends on the model structure From the experiments performed in Set A with a SO-NR culture not-acclimated to nitrite (  The maximum specific growth rate estimated ( Experiments corresponding to Set B ( Similarly to the non-acclimated biomass tests in Set A, kinetic parameters related to denitritation ( Regarding the calibration of nitrate reduction, kinetic parameters previously estimated from test B-2 were used to estimate Biomass acclimated to nitrite presented high denitritation rates since no accumulation of nitrite was observed in test B-2 ( Test B-3 ( Comparison of the parameters in As expected, the parameters obtained in Set B were different from those previously obtained in Set A (Section Finally, in this calibration the uncertainties for all the parameters were slightly higher than those obtained in previous calibrations for denitritation and two-step denitrification biomass acclimated to nitrite (Sections From the results obtained in this work it can be concluded that the two-step denitrification associated to thiosulfate oxidation was successfully described with the kinetic model proposed and calibrated herein, which has not been previously reported in other studies. The calibration of the model allowed the experimental data fitting as well as the prediction of the biomass growth associated, which was necessary to properly estimate the kinetic parameters. Denitritation was satisfactorily described through a Haldane equation with the SO-NR cultures acclimated and non-acclimated to nitrite. The effect of nitrite acclimation was also evaluated and it was confirmed that the biomass presented high resistance and resilience to nitrite concentrations up to 150 Two-step denitrification could be correctly described by using the stoichiometric coefficients corresponding particularly to the biomass used in this work. Terms related to a non-competitive inhibition between nitrate and nitrite were excluded since this behavior was not observed with the SO-NR culture studied. In addition, the kinetic parameters estimated presented a high sensitivity to model predictions since small confidence intervals were assessed with the FIM method. Results obtained in this work provide complementary information to research related with the simultaneous desulfurization and denitrification required to treat waste liquid effluents, as thiosulfate or nitrate containing wastewaters with low organic carbon content. This would be the case of SANI process intermediate effluents, which may contain high concentrations of thiosulfate as a result of a sulfate/sulfite reduction The Spanish government (