The demand on minerals with increasing product fineness is currently rising in many industrial applications. Especially in dry grinding processes, fine powders are difficult to produce and to handle. Particle-particle attractive forces, which become more decisive with decreasing particle size, lead to a higher extent of agglomeration, material adherences and a more cohesive flow behavior. As a consequence, dry fine grinding processes demand large quantities of energy due to the amount of applied energy that is dissipated into heat. Current approaches for improving the energy efficiency mainly cover the improvement of a) machine equipment and b) the material behavior. The main focus of this study was to investigate both aspects within one single study: On the one hand, dry fine grinding of limestone was investigated in a dry operated stirred media mill, which is a promising and emerging option for dry fine grinding applications. On the other hand, the impact of the particle stabilization by liquid grinding aids on the grinding performance was evaluated. It was demonstrated that the grinding mechanism inside the mill depends on both the mill parameters as well as the powder flow behavior. Therefore, it is of crucial importance to adjust the mill parameters to the applied grinding aid when it comes to dry fine grinding in media mills.The production of fine minerals and mineral products is often linked to high energy consumptions. Especially dry fine grinding processes require high specific energies because most of the applied energy is transferred into heat. Moreover, material sticking and adhesion of the fine dry particles lower the grinding efficiency significantly. Considering an increasing demand on fine minerals, new methods improving the common production ways are of great importance. The different approaches for increasing the energy efficiency of dry fine grinding processes can roughly be divided into three groups: (1) further development of mills and mill equipment, (2) improving classifiers as well as grinding-classifying-circuits and (3) enhancing the process behavior of the ground material [ Nowadays, conventional ball mills are steadily being replaced by more efficient mill types like vertical roller mills or high pressure grinding rolls [ An enhancement of the grinding process by controlling the behavior of the ground material is mainly achieved with the aid of various liquid chemicals (see e.g. [ Within this work, the investigation of dry fine grinding in a vertical stirred media mill is combined with the evaluation of the product behavior as a consequence of the particle stabilization. Therefore, limestone was milled in batch-wise experiments using different liquid grinding aids as stabilizing additives. Furthermore, process and mill parameters as well as grinding aid dosage strategies have been varied in order to investigate their impacts on the grinding efficiency. Thereby, the interdependence of the mill parameters and the product behavior was evaluated. The dry fine grinding experiments were carried out in a self-constructed batch-wise operated vertical stirred media mill shown in The mill consists of a 1.6 L stainless steel grinding chamber (2). The chamber was designed with rounded edges to ensure a sufficient material mixing, even in the lower mill segments. A double-shell (3) enables the jacket cooling for the temperature control of the mill charge. Further, an air stream can be passed into the mill via an air connector (4) at the bottom of the grinding chamber. Prior to this process, the air is led through a cooling coil (5) which is placed inside the cooling jacket. Thereby, the air stream is tempered at the same value as the walls of the grinding chamber. This combination offers a better temperature control of the milling process. Using water as cooling medium, process temperatures of 5 to 80 °C can be investigated. The shaft (1) can be equipped with up to four cross stirrers (6) depending on the filling ratio on the mill. Both, shaft and stirrers are also made of stainless steel. The air stream is discharged from the mill via a filter (8) on top of the chamber lid (7). Separated particles are removed from the filter surface by tapping and led back to the grinding chamber by gravity. The addition of liquid grinding aids is realized either by an interface in the chamber lid or by an injection into the air stream within the connection part at the chamber bottom (4). The dosage is controlled by a syringe pump 540060 of TSE Systems. Moreover, the specific energy As the mill did not exceed a gross power draw of 190 W within this study, the temperature inside the grinding chamber did not increase by >4 °C in the grinding experiments. Thus, possible temperature effects are neglected within the following discussion. The impact of the stress conditions inside the mill on the grinding result was examined by varying the media size Further mill parameters, which do not have a primary effect regarding the stress energy of the grinding beads, were held constant in all experiments (see Limestone Durcal 40 with a mean particle size of x In order to investigate the impact of the product powder flowability on the grinding process, the flow behavior of the powder was specifically adjusted by adding different liquid grinding aids. According to a former study [ Within the standard procedure, the entire amount of grinding aid was dropped on the limestone inside the mill prior to the grinding experiment. In an additional section (see Particle size distributions were measured by laser diffraction using a Helos instrument (Sympatec, Germany). The device fulfills ISO 13320 and is equipped with a laser with a wavelength of 632.8 nm, a SUCELL dispersion unit and the lens system R2 for analyzing particles in a range of 0.25–87.5 μm. For the analysis, the powder samples were dispersed in 96% ethanol and treated with ultrasonic (60 s) prior to the analysis. Samples for the particle size analysis were taken from the total amount of ground material. 3 measurements were done for each test setting. The powder flowability was analyzed using a ring shear tester RST-XS (Dietmar Schulze Schüttguttechnik, Germany) and a 30 mL shear cell. Measurements were performed at ambient conditions directly after the grinding experiment. At the beginning of the shear test, the powder sample was pre-sheared under a normal stress in order to load the bulk material with a major consolidation stress In this study, the flowability index Within this study, DEG and HepAc were chosen as grinding aids since they are known to cause a significantly different flow behavior of fine limestone powders [ It can be seen, that the grinding result strongly depends on the particle stabilization achieved by grinding aid molecules. While DEG affects a more efficient grinding in the beginning of the process, HepAc shows the better results at high product finenesses (approx. x Interestingly, certain similarities are observed between the grinding results (left) and the powder flowability index It is known from wet operated stirred mills, that the grinding result strongly depends on the stressing energy of the grinding beads Even though these machine-related parameters were held constant in Early works by Hanisch and Schubert [ Schönert gave estimations of In other studies [  It can be stated that the influence of the different powder flow behaviors on the grinding result also depends on the powder filling inside the mill. At low filling ratios of 25 and 50% the two additives affect almost the same x The results show that the consideration of the active mass As already suggested, the relation between stress intensity and breakage behavior of the particles stressed within the active volume needs to be considered when describing the grinding process. Indications for this kind of dependencies can already be derived from the present study. As it can be seen from Obviously, this impact on the breakage behavior alters the whole particle size distribution. The impact of the two grinding aids on the width of the particle size distribution is shown in The diagram underlines the assumption that the powder flowability (i.e. the kind of grinding aid) influences the breakage behavior between the beads, and thus, the shape of the particle size distribution. Thereby, low and high powder flowabilities lead to a broader and narrower particle size distribution, respectively. In the case of DEG, the size distribution becomes even wider with increasing specific energy input, while it stays almost constant or even decreases ( As only values like the x In the following, a more detailed process study is presented in order to identify how to adjust the mill parameters to the product flow behavior. Certainly, the breakage behavior of the product particles entails even more overlapping impacts. On the ground that the material is not varied in this study, the breakage behavior is not further considered as a parameter. The impact of the grinding media size on the grinding result was investigated by varying the bead size of the alumina grinding media. Thereby, the stirrer tip speed and the product filling ratio were held constant at 2 m/s and 100%, respectively. As it is shown, the grinding result depends on the bead size, and thus, on the grinding conditions inside the mill. Thereby, different impacts of the bead size can be identified for the two grinding aids. Regarding DEG, the grinding performance is almost independent of the bead size as long as a critical, minimum bead size is exceeded. At the smallest bead size of 1.4 mm, the stress energy of the grinding beads is too small to enable an efficient comminution of those particles, which are captured and stressed between the beads. In contrast to that, grinding becomes more efficient when providing higher stress energies by using coarser beads of 2.0 mm and more. A further increase of the bead size does not lead to an additional improvement of the grinding performance, even though the stress energy of the beads steadily increases. At this point, further aspects lead to counteracting effects: According to Eq. By using HepAc as grinding aid, much stronger dependencies of the grinding process on the grinding bead size are observed. Again, the smallest beads cause a comparatively inefficient process. However, better results are obtained than using the small beads in combination with DEG, which can be explained by a smaller mass of captured particles at each bead collision when using HepAc. Hence, the previously very low stress intensities with DEG are slightly increased, making the process more efficient. The same effect is achieved regarding the 2.0 and 3.2 mm beads, where the most efficient grinding, and thus, much better results are observed than using DEG. However, the grinding efficiency drops off again when using large beads of 3.8 mm. Here, the stress energy of the beads is too high in comparison to the (low) mass of captured particles. In the case of overly high stress intensities, excessive energy may dissipate into heat instead of being used for particle breakage. Furthermore, the combination of large beads and high powder flowability is accompanied with a low product related stress frequency, which might result in an insufficient quantity of mechanical impacts on each product particle.  The diagram emphasizes the findings from the variation of the grinding bead size. Again, stronger impacts can be seen whilst using HepAc. While the best result is achieved by using alumina media, the beads with a higher density and thus a higher stress energy lead to a less efficient grinding. On the one hand, the higher stress intensities may lead to a higher dissipation of excessive energy at collisions of those heavier beads. On the other hand, grinding times needed to be shortened for steel and zirconia media in order to introduce comparable amounts of energy to the mill chamber as a consequence of the higher power consumption of the mill. Consequently, the total number of bead contacts was reduced simultaneously. In combination with a high powder flowability, and thus, a low extent of particle capturing between the beads, the overall product related stress number is even lower. However, further impacts overlap the grinding results. This can especially be seen from the results of the zirconia beads, which are not in between the other two materials, as it was expected regarding the material density. Here, other parameters like the surface roughness or the friction behavior of the beads may have overlapping influences on the grinding result, as it was already observed for wet stirred milling processes [ A “compensation” of the low number of bead contacts can be achieved by capturing higher amounts of product particles between the beads, as seen with DEG. As long as the stress energy of the beads is in an appropriate range to break those higher amounts of particles efficiently, nearly no disadvantages are caused by beads with higher densities. Even on the contrary, as beads with higher densities enable similar product qualities in smaller grinding times, they might be favorable especially in continuously operated grinding processes. From an energetic point of view, the best results with DEG are obtained with the moderately-heavy zirconia beads. Here, the combination of stress energy (as well as contact number) and captured particles seems to be preferable compared to the alumina and steel beads. By using the 3.2 mm alumina media the impact of the stirrer tip speed was investigated in a range of 1–4 m/s. In this case, certain similarities can be observed for the two grinding aids. In both cases, the worst grinding efficiency is found for the highest tip speed, which indicates that the stress energy is too high, resulting in an increase of dissipation as excess energy. Comparing the different tip speeds, lower efficiencies are also observed for the smallest tip speed, whereas HepAc achieves better results for 1 m/s due a lower captured product mass, and thus, higher stress intensities. The optima are obtained by medium tip speeds of 3 m/s (DEG) and 2 m/s (HepAc), which is also consistent with the model scheme of particle capturing regarding powder flowability. Therefore, an optimum stress intensity exists at which the energy utilization has an optimum value as it is already well known from wet stirred media milling [ In order to further investigate the impacts of the product flow behavior on the grinding result at medium product filling ratios, the stirrer tip speed was also varied exemplary for a filling ratio of 50%. The product fineness mainly depends on the stirrer tip speed and the specific energy input over a wide range, but less on the added grinding aid. Hence, the diagram underlines that the extent of the powder flow impact decreases at low filling ratios. However, in the beginning of the process as well as at small particle sizes obtained at high energies, slight differences between the two grinding aids are observed. While DEG affects the better results at small energy inputs, the grinding efficiency is higher at very fine product sizes by using HepAc. Here, the impacts of either too high (HepAc) or too low (DEG) powder flowabilities become obvious once again. As the product filling ratio in continuous production mills is difficult to control, the derivation of global rules regarding the choice of grinding aids is made even more difficult. The impact of different grinding aids as well as various mill parameters on the product filling ratio inside continuous operated dry stirred media mill is an ongoing work. In some industrial applications, the use of high stress energies may be preferred (e.g. due to shorter resulting process times), which might make flow assisting grinding aids like HepAc less favorable. If one of those grinding aids is the desired additive though (e.g. for affecting certain product qualities), a continuous grinding aid addition might be the right choice. Thereby, high amounts of grinding aids are prevented, especially in the beginning of the process where a high powder flowability can be disadvantageous due to the coarse product. For DEG, the grinding efficiency is slightly reduced by a continuous grinding aid addition, which may be explained by a lower state of stabilization due to the lower additive amount. However, the powder flowability does not changed significantly compared to that one obtained by grinding with the complete addition prior to the process. In contrast to that, the powder flowability is strongly reduced by a continuous addition in case of HepAc. This in turn leads to a slightly better grinding performance especially at small specific energy inputs because those critical high flowabilities are prevented.  In industrial processes, a possible way of transferring those results may be achieved by adding the grinding aid(s) at different injection interfaces inside the mill. Thereby, an initial addition of flowability-irrevelant additives like DEG might be favorable, since the particle capturing of the coarse material is improved. Furthermore, an adequate particle stabilization as well as sufficient retention times are guaranteed at the same time. As the product becomes finer as well as more cohesive across the mill length, an additional continuous dosage of flow-assisting additives like HepAc in later mill sections may be considered as a good option. Thus, optimal particle capturing, a good material transport as well as a superior bead motion are maintained. These issues remain under investigation in current research. The results emphasize a strong impact of the powder flowability on the dry fine grinding of limestone in a batch-wise operated stirred media mill. Since the flow behavior of the product is more or less affected by liquid grinding aids, the grinding performance depends on both the process parameters of the mill as well as the particle stabilization by an additive. As it was shown, the effects are even more decisive at medium and high product filling ratios, which are favorable regarding high productivities in industrial processes. The study revealed that it is crucial to adjust the process parameters of the mill under recognition of the type of grinding aid concerning dry fine grinding in stirred media mills. Since the flow behavior of the product powder determines the amount of particles captured between the grinding beads, the stress intensity as well as the product-related stress frequency inside the mill firmly depend on both process parameters and grinding aid. While a higher stress energy tends to be more favorable in the case of cohesive product powders, flow-assisting additives affect a more efficient grinding at lower stress energies. Particularly, when grinding to the lower micron range, and thus, dealing with cohesive powder, particle capturing between the beads as well as grinding performance are mainly optimized by grinding aids, which are improving the powder flowability. Besides particle capturing, also the overall motion of the grinding beads is affected by the product flowability. A too low flowability is assumed to cause a hindered motion of the beads resulting in lower stress energies and lower stress frequencies of the beads. The grinding results clearly show, that analogous to wet stirred media milling an optimum stress intensity, which leads to the highest energy utilization as well as the lowest specific energy consumption for a demanded product fineness, also exists for dry fine grinding processes. Moreover, some parallels between the role of the powder flowability and the viscosity in wet grinding processes can be found. Furthermore, the grinding aid affects the width of the particle size distribution as the stress intensity determines the breakage behavior of coarse and more robust particles. Also, it could be demonstrated that the dosage strategy of the grinding aid might be a helpful tool for optimizing the grinding efficiency. However, it only plays a minor role compared to an adequate adjustment of process parameters and grinding aid. In future research, the results from these batch experiments will be transferred to continuous grinding processes, where the fineness as well as the cohesiveness of the powder increases across the mill length. Thereby, the powder flowability plays an additional role regarding axial material transport and retention time of the product inside the mill. We acknowledge the German