Magnetic element is the basic component of matrix in high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS), and its configurative parameters such as size have marked effects on the capture efficiency of the matrix. Therefore, the geometric design of the element should be matched with the properties of the material to be separated, to optimize the HGMS performance. In this work, the capture of independent magnetic particles on a cylindrical element in pulsating HGMS process was theoretically described, and their size matching ratios (magnetic element to particle) under the maximum capture probability and critical capture conditions were specifically discussed. These theoretically calculated size ratios were much larger than that (2.69) in the literatures available, but generally consistent with those obtained from pulsating HGMS applications. The theoretical analysis were basically validated by the actual capture of ilmenite and hematite particles on cylindrical elements, using an experimental magnetic capture method. According to the new theoretical model, the size matching ratio is not fixed at the value of 2.69. It depends on the properties of the material to be separated such as volume magnetic susceptibility and the operating parameters of a HGMS process such as magnetic induction and flow velocity through the magnetic element. This theoretical description provides a new fundamental understanding in the size matching between magnetic element and particle, and would contribute to the solution of size matching issue in the real capture situation considering the interactions between magnetic particles, and therefore to the optimal design and operations of matrix in HGMS applications.High gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is effective for the concentration or removal of paramagnetic particles from various suspensions, with the sizes of separable particle in the range of several to several tens of micrometers ( It is an operational criterion that a fine or sharply-shaped magnetic element should be adopted to separate fine magnetic particles from suspension, as the finer element produces a higher magnetic field gradient and a sufficiently strong magnetic force upon the particles ( Thus, the current size ratio for magnetic element to particle cannot be precisely used to design a magnetic matrix for a given material. In fact, over the decades, extensive theoretical and simulative investigations were reported on the retentive dynamics of a magnetic particle approaching to a magnetic element in HGMS process ( In this work, the magnetic capture of independent magnetic particles on a cylindrical magnetic element in the pulsating HGMS process was theoretically described, based on which the size matching ratios under the maximum capture probability and critical capture conditions were specifically discussed. These theoretical ratios were basically validated by the actual capture of ilmenite and hematite particles in the pulsating HGMS process, using an experimental magnetic capture method ( A pulsating HGMS process was particularly chosen for this investigation, but this description is applicable to any HGMS processes. As shown in The induced magnetization in Eq. As Combining Eqs. It is clear that the magnetic force depends on the properties of particle such as particle size and volume magnetic susceptibility, the applied magnetic induction and the size of element. Further, we consider the particle is independent and free of interactions from neighboring particles. In pulsating HGMS process, the competing forces against the capture by magnetic force are the hydrodynamic drag caused by feed and pulsation of fluid, and gravity as shown in In the capture process as shown in Thus, the hydrodynamic drag may be expressed a: And the effective gravity is: For an effective capture of the particle onto the element, the interactive force between the magnetic element and particle should be attractive, i.e., the magnetic force should counteract the competing force: Obviously, the probability for the particle being effectively captured onto the magnetic element is determined by the magnetic force, hydrodynamic drag and gravity: In addition, in the pulsating HGMS for fine particles, the gravity acting on the particle is significantly smaller than that of hydrodynamic drag. For instance, when a fine ilmenite particle with a diameter of 0.040 mm is carried through the element at a low feed velocity of 1.0 cm/s, the hydrodynamic drag acting onto the particle is approximately 27 times as that of the gravity. Thus, the capture probability is expressed as: Eq. In the pulsating HGMS process, the magnetic field is parallel to the direction of fluid flow and they are both perpendicular to the axis of magnetic element as shown in In the actual capture process, the effective capture radius of a cylindrical magnetic element to magnetic particles is in the range of 0.5 The capture of the magnetic particles onto the magnetic element in pulsating HGMS process is dynamic, and the accumulation of particles onto the element would produce an effect on the magnetic field distribution around the element ( For a given magnetic particle with the diameter of The derivative of By setting From Eq. Therefore, under the conditions for the maximum capture probability, the size matching ratio is 2.69 times the capture distance or layers of magnetic particles captured onto the element. For most of the particles, their actual size ratios may deviate from this relationship, as the capture of a magnetic particle is also related to the properties of the particle such as shape and the operating parameters of HGMS process, as we have mentioned afore and clearly described in Eqs. The critical size matching denotes a critical condition, under which a magnetic particle may be captured by the magnetic element or escape from the capture. In the pulsating HGMS process, the fluid flows up and down in the separating zone of the separator as shown in For an independent spherical particle with homogeneous mass and magnetism distributions, the capture occurs only if: In fact, the particles may also be captured onto the element when the capture probability The capture regions of magnetic element are determined by the critical angle If the magnetic particle collides with the element in a single layer, from Eq. They are further expressed as: For a HGMS process without fluid pulsation, i.e., From Eq. These theoretically calculated results are all in accordance with the tenets of pulsating HGMS practices ( A Slon-100 cyclic pilot-scale pulsating HGGS separator (made by SLon Magnetic Separator Ltd) is used for the present investigation. This separator is fed periodically and its detailed description on the separation mechanism is early reported by When the separator is operated, a direct current flows through the energizing coils and a magnetic field is built up in the separating zone of the separator. Firstly, the separating zone is filled with flowing water so that the pulsating energy is transmitted to the separating zone, in which the level of water and its flowrate is adjustable through the valve below the pulsating mechanism. Then, the slurry is fed into the magnetic elements located in the separating zone via feed box, with magnetic particles captured onto the elements and non-magnetic particles flowing out of the zone. When a batch of feed is finished, the energizing current is switched off and the magnetic particles captured onto the elements are washed out to get a magnetic product. The experimental confirmations were achieved with an innovative Magnetic Capture Analysis (MCA) method ( For the present experiments, the magnetic elements of 60 mm length were inserted in the frame at a sufficiently large spacing to avoid magnetic coupling effect between the elements. Specifically, for the 3.0 mm magnetic elements, the spacing between neighboring elements was fixed at 6 mm in the frame. The magnetic field and flow velocity distributions around the magnetic elements, which were obtained from COMSOL Multiphysics simulations, are shown in Then, the frame inserted with the elements was placed in the separating zone of SLon-100 cyclic pilot-scale pulsating HGMS separator. When a separation process was finished, the frame was taken out of the separator, and the magnetic particles captured onto the wires were washed out with clean water and dried for weighing and analysis. A high-grade ilmenite concentrate assaying 46.88% TiO For all the experimental confirmations, 20 g narrow-sized particles was fully mixed in a stirring beaker at a solid concentration of 2%; then, it was slowly fed to the SLon-100 cyclic pilot-scale pulsating HGMS separator at a fixed feed time of 2 min. The material was maintained in the separator for a sufficiently long time of 8 min, to ensure the full capture of magnetic particles onto the elements. In the experiments, single elements with diameters of 2 and 3 mm were comparatively used. For each capture experiment, three elements were inserted in the frame of the Magnetic Capture Analysis Method. When a separation process was finished, the captured particles onto the elements were washed out with clean water, and they were dried and weighed. The mass weight for each narrow-sized magnetic particles captured onto each element, which has an effective capture length of 56 mm, was used to evaluate the capture performance. It should be noted that the critical capture particle size was approximately calculated as that whose capture mass weight was significantly varied between two adjoining narrow-sized fractions, as shown in For all of the experiments, the investigations were carried out under the operating parameters as shown in It can be seen from It is easy to understand that the increased size ratios at higher magnetic induction are resulted from the enhanced magnetic capture force to finer magnetic particles. For instance in Similar to this analysis, the reduced critical size ratios at higher pulsating velocity were resulted from the enhanced hydrodynamic drag upon magnetic particles, which led to the ineffective capture to finer particles. As shown in The dependence of size ratios on the magnetic induction and element size in the pulsating HGMS process was also investigated for hematite particles. From It can be seen from Comparing the size ratios in For a more in-depth evaluation on the theoretical description of size matching, the experimental ratios The difference between the experimental and theoretical ratios in But as we can see, the theoretical ratios are generally consistent with the experimental values, so that it is still sufficient to confirm the correctness of the theoretical descriptions. The magnetic capture of an independent magnetic particle on a single cylindrical magnetic element in the pulsating HGMS was theoretically described, and new theoretical models for size matching ratio between the magnetic element and particle, under the maximum capture probability and critical capture conditions, were respectively derived. According to the new models, the size ratio is not fixed at 2.69 as reported in the existing literatures. It depends on the properties of material to be separated such as volume magnetic susceptibility and on the operating parameters of HGMS process such as magnetic induction and flow velocity through the magnetic element. Generally, the theoretically calculated ratios are consistent with the practical pulsating HGMS operations. It is particularly noted that these theoretical descriptions and models are not limited to the pulsating HGMS process. The theoretical descriptions and models for the size matching ratio were basically confirmed by the experimental magnetic capture of the ilmenite and hematite particles on the cylindrical magnetic elements in the pulsating HGMS process, through an innovative Magnetic Capture Analysis method. There is definitely difference between the theoretical and experimental ratios due to the restrictions encountered in this investigation as we have detailed, however it is still sufficient to confirm the correctness of this new theoretical description. This theoretical description has provided a new fundamental understanding in the size matching between magnetic element and particle, and would contribute to the solution of size matching issue in the real capture situation considering the interactions of magnetic particles, and therefore to the optimal design and operations of matrix in HGMS applications. This creative research work was supported by the