A model has been developed to describe the operation of a Knelson concentrator by considering the main forces that act on particles within the concentrating chamber. It is postulated that the deportment of particles is dependent on the dynamic equilibrium between the fluid drag, centripetal and Bagnold’s forces, which are functions of the material properties as well as the key operating parameters such as fluidisation water flowrate and speed of rotation. Based on this concept a criterion has been developed that determines the recovery of minerals of different sizes and densities adequately. It has also been shown that this criterion determines the extent of competition between particles that exist within Knelson concentrators.The use of gravity concentration in the gold industry has grown significantly since the 1970s. This resurgence is in part due to the growing emphasis on sustainable development ( The Knelson concentrators are commonly used in the gold industry as gravity concentration devices because of their ability to recover coarse and fine gold from both alluvial and primary deposits. The device is most commonly installed (  Installation of a KC unit into the grinding circuit is dependent on the economics as well as the presence of coarse liberated gold in the grinding circuit. Attempts to develop reliable mathematical models of this unit has been difficult due to: The description of particle/particle interactions is complex. The conical shape of the bowl results in variations in The effect of fluid drag on the particles due to the fluidising water which in turn is affected by particle shape and viscosity effects. This paper describes an attempt to develop a model for the KC based on a mechanistic approach by considering the effects of the dominant forces acting on the particles. The KC is a relatively new concentrating device which has only been commercially available since 1980. Since then its use has been well documented, usually in the form of a case study pertaining to particular operations but descriptions of the mechanisms involved or the theoretical considerations have been limited.   It is noticeable in the figures of The use of recovery as a predictor of KC performance is limiting. Recovery is related to the amount of mineral recovered in the concentrate and the amount of the mineral in the feed. The KC operates in a batch mode, hence at some point the concentrate chambers in the bowl would reach full capacity. Incoming mineral particles will then bounces off the concentrate bed and leave the unit, thereby decreasing the recovery. If the recovery is to be used as a predictor it is important not to overfeed the KC. The fact that the Knelson concentrator bowl is of a fixed capacity does limit the amount of gold collected which has implications on the cycle time in batch plant operations. It can be observed that when a particle enters the bowl of the KC it gets suspended in the water and traverses the bowl in a helical motion prior to exiting the bowl if it is not trapped within the rings. As the bowl rotates at an angular velocity of The solid particles, being heavier than water will also move outwards relative to the water and towards the bowl periphery and encounters the fluidising water that enters through the orifices in the bowl periphery. Hence the solid particles would experience a fluid drag force In addition, a particle moving towards the periphery would encounter particles already in the established particle bed and experiences a particle/particle interaction force, commonly known as the Bagnold force. Considering that the outer edge of the particle bed rotates at the speed of the bowl, the shear rate can be assumed to be proportional to the tangential velocity of the bowl at the outer radius. Also, since the thickness of the particle bed formed within the rings of the bowl is relatively constant the effect of concentration may be considered constant. It can readily be shown that the shearing process occurring within the KC, would be in the inertial regime as described by The particle will move into the concentrate chamber and be retained, or The particle will move out of the concentrate chamber and get carried up by the upward flow into the tailings stream. Since both The magnitude of the drag force will depend on the fluidisation water flowrate, and the particle size while the magnitude of the net force, Experimental work was undertaken using synthetic materials to study the effect this parameter The recovery of material of different sizes and densities in a 3    Initial experiments were conducted on a 3 Material of uniform size and density was processed in the KC at several speeds of bowl rotation ( It can be seen from This situation can be compared to that exist in a fluidised bed ( The parameter A Weibull distribution as described by The variations in the model parameters with operating variables such as particle size, fluidizing water and rotational speed was established through least square regressions and are listed below along with their respective Using Eqs. When a feed to the KC consists of a mixture of particles of different sizes and densities, each material of a given size and density would compete against the others to remain within the concentrating chamber. The initial work on mixtures was conducted with mixtures of material of same density but of different sizes to determine the relative extents of each particle size collected. Mixtures of Silica comprising 3 sizes were fed in equal amounts into the KC for a range of operating variables. It can be seen from The amount of silica sand of each size class recovered in a mixture experiment to that recovered when each size is processed individually is shown in It can be seen that the transition from constant volume recovery occurs for both pure and mixed Silica feed at an  It shows the same trend shown in Evidence in Using Eq. Processing of synthetic mixtures using a 3.5 The data in The proposed mathematical model is capable of predicting the volume recovery of minerals in a laboratory KC as evidenced by the data presented above and may be refined to predict the performance of an industrial unit. The model indicates that the operating parameters such as the fluidisation water flowrate could be chosen such that the gold particles are in the non-fluidised regime while the gangue particles are in a fluidised state. Given the composition of an ore in terms of the size and density of its component minerals, such as gold, sulphide and gangue content, it would be possible to calculate the operating conditions for an industrial unit that would optimise the gold recovery. Once the operating conditions for optimal recovery of gold have been determined, the cycle time may be chosen so that the maximum amount of gold the unit can recover is achieved but not overloaded which would result in a loss of recovery. By identifying a criterion that indicates the state of fluidisation in the bowl of a Knelson concentrator under different feed and operating parameters, a preliminary mathematical model has been developed to predict its performance.