Objective
                  Intramedullary nailing (IMN) of obese patients with femoral fractures can be difficult due to soft tissue considerations and overall body habitus. Complications including malrotation can occur and have significant impact on postoperative function. The purpose of this study was to evaluate femoral rotation after intramedullary nailing of obese and non-obese patients to see if there was a difference in rotation, complications and any risk factors for malrotation.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Between 2000 and 2009, 417 consecutive patients with femur fractures treated with IM nail at Level I trauma and tertiary referral center. Of these, 335 with postoperative computed tomography (CT) scanogram of the bilateral lower extremities were included in this study. Baseline demographic, perioperative and postoperative femoral version calculations were included in the dataset. Statistical analysis included chi-squared test for categorical data, t-test for continuous data, and univariate and multivariate regression analysis. Significance was set at p
                     <0.05.
               
                  Results
                  Of the 417 patients with femur fractures between 2000 and 2009, 335 met criteria for this study. There were 111 patients with a BMI <25, 129 with BMI 25–29.9, and 95 patients with a BMI >30. When BMI was categorised into 3 groups (<25, 25–29.9, or 30+), none of these groups were predictive of version in univariate or multivariate regressions. Among only obese patients (BMI 30+), BMI of 35+ was not a significant predictor of version when compared to BMI 30–34.9. There were no significant differences in femoral version based on entry point (antegrade vs. retrograde) in any BMI category. There were also no significant difference between groups of patients with a DFV of >15̊ (p
                     =0.212).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Based on this study, BMI did not have an effect on postoperative difference in femoral version. In fact, in our multivariate regression analysis, BMI of over 30 was actually predictive of significantly lower difference in femoral version. While other studies have documented the intraoperative difficulties encountered with obese patients with femur fractures, the outcome of femoral rotation is not affected by an increasing BMI.According to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 37.5% of U.S. adults were obese in 2009–2010 Some of the difficulties encountered in femoral nailing of obese patients have been described Malrotation following intramedullary nailing (IM) of femur fractures may lead to complications such as malunion, alteration of gait and patellofemoral mechanics, limitation of hip motion, and ultimately lead to patient dissatisfaction. The rate of malrotation following IM nailing may be as high as 27.6% Between 2000 and 2009, 417 consecutive patients with femoral diaphyseal fractures were treated with an IM nail and included retrospectively in our institution's femoral IM nail registry. Inclusion criteria for this study included complete baseline and demographic documentation as well as postoperative CT scanogram for version measurement of the bilateral femurs. Exclusion criteria included bilateral injuries, previous injury, previous deformity, and those with complete data sets. Of the initial 417 subjects, 335 met the inclusion criteria and were included in this study. Institutional protocol dictated that one of the two following methods was used to determine rotation for all fractures in which it could not be assessed intra-operatively by cortical alignment due to comminution: (1) pre-operatively, the contour of the lesser trochanter was noted fluoroscopically with the ipsilateral patella facing directly anterior. This saved image was then used in order to match a similar lesser trochanteric contour on the injured femur. or (2) the quantitative measurement test published by Tornetta et al. Femoral version was measured bilaterally as originally described by Dugdale et al. BMI was first treated as a continuous variable. It was then re-classified into a categorical variable as follows: BMI <25, BMI 25–29.9, and BMI 30+. Per group, mean DFV was calculated and compared without controlled regression analysis via ANOVA. In addition to BMI, we also sought to evaluate any potential effect of body weight. Other data included in our analysis were age, sex, mechanism of injury, open vs. closed fracture, antegrade vs. retrograde IMN, nail starting point (greater trochanter vs. piriformis), and AO and Winquist classifications. Standard descriptive statistics, including mean and standard deviation (SD), were used to report baseline and demographic data. Categorical data were analysed using chi-square or Fisher exact tests, as appropriate. Next, including all of the aforementioned variables, regression analysis was conducted. First, univariate, followed by stepwise, multivariate regressions were used to test for associations between independent variables and our primary outcome variable (DFV). Statistical significance was defined as Of the 417 patients with femur fractures between 2000 and 2009, 335 met criteria for this study. There were 111 patients with a BMI <25 (33.1%), 129 with BMI 25–29.9 (38.5%), and 95 patients with a BMI >30 (28.4%). As a continuous variable, BMI was significantly, albeit weakly, predictive of post-operative DFV in univariate regression ( The mean DFV for each of the three aforementioned BMI categories is listed in More than one out of three people in the U.S. are obese, and treating obese patients with femur fractures has many implications. In addition to the increased costs of treating obese patients associated with longer rehabilitation times Difficulties encountered during antegrade femoral nailing of obese patients has been documented by multiple operating room variables, as well as complications. Tucker et al. found a 52% greater average operative time in obese patients during antegrade nailing, but no difference in average operative time in retrograde nailing Based on this study, BMI did not have an effect on postoperative difference in femoral version. In fact, in our multivariate regression analysis, BMI of over 30 was actually predictive of significantly lower difference in femoral version. While other studies have documented the intraoperative difficulties encountered with obese patients with femur fractures, the outcome of femoral rotation is not affected by an increasing BMI. One possible explanation for this finding, is that having a larger BMI and soft tissue envelope around the femur, will potentially decrease the amount of initial displacement and allow for a more anatomic reduction. In addition, the surgical team may be more aware of the potential difficulties when faced with an obese patient, and be more diligent in attempting to prevent malrotation. Also, intraoperative clinical assessment of limb alignment may be more difficult in obese patients, and relying more on radiographic criteria of alignment may be more accurate. The authors have no direct or indirect conflict of interests and have no received funding in regards to this project. Ethical review board approval was obtained prior to the start and maintained until completion of the study.