This comprehensive study gives evidence of reversible and irreversible embrittlement in ultra-high-strength steel through destructive testing. Several tempering temperatures ranging from 350 °C to 700 °C were designated to observe temper embrittlement in the steel. Charpy impact, hardness, and tensile tests were performed for assessing the mechanical behavior of the steel. Stereo microscopy was utilized to examine the fractured surfaces and microstructural analysis was performed with the help of an optical microscope. During tempering, reversible temper embrittlement occurs due to the formation of alloy carbides between martensite plates while irreversible temper embrittlement is preferably due to the segregation of impurity elements (i.e. P and S) on grain boundaries as well as due to the coarsening of alloy carbides. It was found that irreversible temper embrittlement transpired when tempering was done in the range of 400–450 °C and reversible temper embrittlement occurred in 650–700 °C temperature range. Results of the notched-bar impact test clearly showed a reduction in impact toughness in susceptible temperature ranges; moreover, the revealed fracture surface and micrograph also validate these findings. Experimental results also validate that both types of embrittlement are detrimental to the mechanical properties owing to the decrease in hardness and tensile strength.Advanced high strength steels (AHSS) are materials of prominent interest for lightweight manufacturing and other structural applications. Lightweight materials are on the mainstream in aerospace, automotive industries, defense-related applications and in several mechanical components including gears, bearings, shafts and cam etc. [ Past researchers showed that steel containing nickel as a major element or normally Ni–Cr steels have greater susceptibility towards temper embrittlement. Additionally, Cr–Mo steel is also prone to temper embrittlement [ It is a well-established fact that through simple heat treatment, the combination of high strength, toughness and excellent fatigue resistance can be accomplished in AHSS steel [ Ni–Cr steel is generally heat-treated by oil quenching, proceeded by tempering. The advantage of tempering is that brittleness of martensite (structure with supersaturated carbon atoms) considerably reduces with the depletion of carbon atoms, as a result, martensitic toughness increases [ In this research work, high strength with medium carbon steel (see In this study, wrought ultra-high-strength steel AISI 4340 was used. The dimensions of the square rod were 20″ by 20” mm in cross-section and 3 ft in length. The chemical composition obtained with the help of Spectroscopy, according to ASTM (E 1085-09), is mentioned in As received square rod was cut down into 10 samples for heat treatment and evaluation of mechanical properties (i.e. impact, tensile strength, and hardness) against the corresponding microstructures. Impact toughness was determined according to Charpy standard (ASTM E23, ISO 148). Tensile samples were prepared in accordance with the ASTM E8 standard as shown in All the samples were heat-treated according to the experimental scheme as presented in To reveal the microstructures all the samples were ground by standard metallographic techniques utilizing 120 to 2000 grit size emery papers sequentially. After grinding, polishing was done at 350 rpm disk speed in a clockwise direction using 0.5 μm alumina suspension with standard polishing cloths (Metkon, turkey) till a mirror-like surface was obtained. The chemical etching was performed with Villella's reagent having a composition of 5 mL HCl containing 1 gm picric acid and 100 mL of ethanol. Freshly prepared etchant was used to expose microstructural features. With that, Metkon Metallurgical Microscope IMM 901 was used for microstructure analysis. Hardness testing was performed by Rockwell hardness tester according to ASTM E18 standard. Three hardness readings were taken from each sample and an averaged value was considered for each specimen. Impact testing was performed after the heat treatment process according to ASTM E23 and ISO 148 while tensile testing was performed in compliance with ASTM E8 standard using a universal tensile testing machine. All the samples were normalized at 870 °C and then oil quenched after reheating at 800 °C as per Impact strength, hardness, and tensile strength are the leading mechanical properties for any ultra-high-strength steel. Their significance cannot be underestimated. These mechanical properties have been determined as a function of tempering temperatures. Three samples were tested for each measurement. The impact strength, tensile strength, and hardness of as-received samples were measured without any heat treatment, whereas the other samples were heat treated as normalized, quenched and the remaining samples were then tempered at different tempering temperatures as shown in Under the normalized condition, steel exhibits the highest impact energy and hardness value compared to the as-quenched sample as shown in (   The variations in hardness may be due to the precipitation or dissolution of transition alloying elements at different tempering temperatures. It can be noted that the hardness of AISI 4340 steel exhibited inconsistent behavior; it decreased with the increase in tempering temperatures as shown in Tensile strength exhibited a non-compliance propensity towards tempering temperature which can be confirmed from  At 350 °C temperature, martensitic laths grow relative to as quench structure along with some carbides precipitation. As the tempering temperature increases, the onset of lath carbides formation occurred within the martensitic matrix ( Above 450 °C the impact strength rises possibly due to the dislocation annihilation phenomenon, and now the microstructure consists of a ferrite matrix with carbides, scattered throughout ( The influence of reversible and irreversible embrittlement is also manifested from the tensile behavior of the steel as shown in (  The study focused on the microstructural changes by performing heat treatment at different tempering temperatures. Results showed that different tempering temperatures bring changes in the microstructure which ultimately leads to different mechanical properties (include impact strength, hardness, and tensile strength). The selected high strength steel displayed two different types of temper embrittlement which occurred at 400 °C and 700 °C tempering temperatures known as irreversible and reversible temper embrittlement respectively. A rapid decline in impact toughness and tensile strength at the above-mentioned temperatures corroborates the existence of embrittlement in such type of high strength steel. Therefore, care should be taken while carrying out heat treatment specially tempering. One should avoid the two extremities of tempering temperature while practicing heat treatment. Formation of carbide precipitate in between martensite laths and along the austenite grain boundaries are responsible for dwindling in impact toughness which occurred at 450 °C and is termed as irreversible tempered embrittlement. Impurity elements (P and S) along with some other hardening elements (Al, Si, V) also causes embrittlement through grain boundary segregation; this type of phenomenon is known as reversible temper embrittlement. Change of fracture appearance (see The authors declare that there is no conflicts of interest.