The effect of metallic aluminium powder on the production of boron carbide–alumina composite was studied. Boric acid, carbon and aluminium powders were mixed in stoichiometric ratio, ball milled and heat treated at temperatures between 1300 and 1650°C for 1–5h in the presence of argon flow. Depending on the ratio of boron oxide to carbon, the formation of boron carbide by the carbothermal reduction, was possible at a temperature of around 1500°C, but with the addition of metallic aluminium to the mixture of boric acid and carbon, the carbide formation temperature was reduced at least 300°C. At 1300°C, B4C was the major phase with alumina in the reaction products. The liquid–solid reaction mechanism, which occurred during the aluminothermic process, had a specific influence on the formation of boron carbide.Boric acid and boron oxide are used in the manufacturing of boron alloys and compounds such as, borides, nitrides and carbides, which are widely used in high-temperature applications Boron compounds, such as boric acid High-purity boron carbide is conventionally produced from elemental boron and carbon in high-temperature processes according to the following reaction Direct processing of boron with carbon is expensive. In this process, a heat resistance furnace is used, and heat is provided by passing a large current through an electrode situated at the centre of the furnace by the reactive mixture of carbon and boric acid. The process temperature can reach 2400 Depending on morphology, surface characteristic and chemical specifications, boron carbide powder can be produced by a number of different routes Besides the conventional carbothermic process, there are a number of processes under investigation for the production of boron-related materials, especially boron carbide Reduction of metal oxides by carbon is a complex process and the rate of the process depends on the process parameters The main purpose of this study is to decrease the reaction temperature for the formation of boron carbide and to determine the minimum amount of aluminium and carbon content for the total conversion of boric acid to boron carbide at the lower temperature. The materials used were boric acid, petroleum coke and metallic aluminium powders. The boric acid was provided by the Etibank borax plant at Bandırma, Turkey, which has the largest borax reserves and is one of the largest boric acid producers in the world Two different compositions of the mixtures were prepared. By adjusting the ratio of B The mixtures were heated to 1300–1650 After the process, the samples reduced were leached with a caustic soda solution to remove any un-reduced contents of boron oxide and carbon by the flotation. Then the samples were dried for further analysis and characterisations. After the carbothermic and the aluminothermic processes, the reaction products were subjected to X-ray diffraction methods. For the determination of phases in the reduced samples, the X-ray diffraction method (D/max Rigaku, Japan) was used with Cu Kα radiation (λ A logical construction can be built up between the intensities of the old and the newly formed phases in the samples. Any formation of boron carbide gives a new peak and the old phase of boron oxide decreases in the processed mixture as well as the carbon peak because it reacts with boron to form boron carbide. A similar relation can be constructed between the aluminium content and the alumina of the samples. The powder products were characterised by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), (microscope model JSM 6060LV JEOL, Japan) and EDS analyses. In Under atmospheric conditions, boron oxide may hydrated to form B(OH)  To investigate the phase formed in the carbothermically and the aluminothermically reduced powders that were heat treated at various temperatures and for various times, XRD analysis was performed; the results are shown in In principle, the formation of boron carbide proceeds according to the overall reaction given below, which is a highly endothermic process; This reaction is thermodynamically feasible above 1450 The ratio of I From the above explanation, the intensity ratio of B As explained above, a considerable weight loss was observed during the calcination of boric acid at 1500 The X-ray diffraction pattern of the boric acid and carbon mixture was presented in   The basic chemical analysis of the reaction products is presented in It is clear from the results that, the phases formed by the process depend on the temperature, the reducing conditions and the time. The morphology of the reaction products can be controlled by the addition of reducing agents. In the absence of metallic aluminium, the product of the reaction is boron carbide, as seen in the X-ray diffraction patterns of the mixture of boric acid and carbon. The addition of metallic aluminium powder to the mixture of boric acid and carbon results in alumina, AlB and AlB The effect of metallic aluminium powder on the production of boron carbide–alumina composite has been investigated in the present work. The aluminothermic reduction of boron oxide is in many ways similar to the carbothermic reduction process. Both processes proceed through the evaporation of boron oxide, carbon monoxide and their interaction. The final products in the mixture of metallic Al, boron oxide and carbon are B