This article develops a versatile structural model specifically suited to describe the dissolution kinetics in leaching processes involving nonporous ore particles. The model accounts explicitly for intraparticle heterogeneity by describing the interplay between the dissolution kinetics of the main solid reactant (e.g. metal oxide) and the dissolution/fragmentation of the solid matrix (gangue). The application to the dissolution of manganiferous ores is thoroughly addressed.Non-catalytic fluid–solid reactions are a class of industrially relevant operations in which the structural properties of solid particles influence and modify the reaction evolution. Within the broad category of “structural properties of solid particles”, several features may be identified, which can be further classified into several sub-categories: (i) surface heterogeneities; (ii) particle ensemble properties; (iii) intraparticle heterogeneity in the spatial distribution of the solid reactant within the solid pellet. Each of these properties leads to a specific modelling since it influences the overall reaction evolution in a different way. The modelling of intraparticle heterogeneity, specifically oriented towards gas–solid non-catalytic reactions, has been extensively investigated by This article develops a structural model, referred to as “sporulation” model, for the dissolution of non-porous ore particles in liquid solutions. The model is based on the assumption that the particulate can be modelled as an ensemble of reactive solid grains (e.g. metallic oxides) embedded into a solid matrix (gangue). The solid matrix may not be chemically inert with the result that, during the dissolution of the ore particle, the solid matrix “sporulates”, i.e., grains of the reactive solid are progressively released from the ore particle into the liquid solution, due either to mechanical fragmentation or to chemical dissolution of the matrix itself. The sporulative release of oxide grains within the liquid phase increases the wetted surface of the solid reactant exposed to the liquid, thus enhancing the dissolution process. The sporulation model can be successfully applied to the analysis of dissolution kinetics of manganiferous ore particles ( A thorough understanding of manganiferous ore leaching kinetics is made complex by the structural properties of the particles and by the spatial distribution of In order to achieve a better understanding of the kinetics underlying the reaction described by Eq. Let us now consider the dissolution kinetics of manganiferous ores (see These experimental observations indicate that a chemical dissolution of the solid matrix (gangue) occurs for manganiferous ores due to the presence of sulphuric acid, The fact that the solid matrix undergoes a dissolution process in the presence of sulphuric acid Eq. The manganiferous ores considered in this study come from an Italian mine located in North Latium and are primarily made up of manganese as pyrolusite Leaching tests were performed in different loading conditions by considering the global reaction reported in Eq. Experiments have also been performed with The mechanism underlying the sporulation model is the following: the ore particle contains smaller grains of the metal oxide that, due to dissolution/fragmentation kinetics of the solid matrix (gangue), are progressively released into the liquid phase, as schematically depicted in In the present formulation of the sporulation model, we assume that: (i) ore particles and oxide grains are spherical; (ii) the chemical reaction schemes for oxide grains and the solid matrix dissolution are given by Eqs. From hypotheses (i)–(iv) it follows that the dynamical evolution of oxide grain radius The distribution of oxide grains within the ore particle is described by the function Let Eqs. In order to fully specify the sporulation model, the functional form of the oxide grain distribution A preliminary analysis of the experimental data reported in This observation has two important consequences: (i) the characteristic time  The occurrence of a value The “homogeneous” sporulation model is capable of a quantitative prediction of the influence of a surplus of sulphuric acid (see The sporulation model is a versatile structural model specifically suited to describe the dissolution kinetics in leaching processes involving non-porous ore particles in which the mineral matrix dissolves, and metallic grains are released into the solution. The sporulative release of solid grains within the liquid phase increases the wetted surface of the solid reactant