It has long been known that rock fabric plays a key role in dictating rock strength and rheology throughout Earth's crust; however the processes and conditions under which rock fabric impacts brittle failure and frictional strength are still under investigation. Here, we report on laboratory experiments designed to analyze the effect of foliation orientation on the mechanical behavior and associated microstructures of simulated fault rock sheared at constant normal stress of 50 MPa. Intact samples of Pennsylvania slate were sheared with a range of initial fabric orientations from 0 to 165° with respect to the imposed shear direction. Foliation orientations of 0–30° produce initial failure at the lowest shear stress; while samples oriented at higher angles are less favorable resulting in higher peak failure strength. In all samples, post-peak development of through-going deformation zones in the R1 Riedel orientation results in a residual strength that is lower than that observed for powdered gouge from the same material. As shear strain increases, all samples approach a residual apparent friction, defined by the ratio of shear strength to normal stress, of ∼0.4. However, the final deformation microstructure depends strongly on the orientation of the pre-existing foliation. When fabric is oriented at low angles to the shear direction (<60°) slip occurs on the pre-existing foliation. Passive rotation of spectator regions becomes apparent for samples with foliation orientation of 60–90°. At higher foliation angles, deformation typically occurs in wide, through-going zones at an R1 orientation that cross-cuts the fabric or in a P-orientation along the fabric. These samples typically exhibit greater geometric layer thinning per unit shear strain. Our results document how pre-existing foliation, in any orientation, can lower the residual shear strength of rock. In contrast, the initial yield strength and peak failure strength of foliated rock is often higher in comparison with powdered samples of the same material, due to strength anisotropy and because activating slip on pre-existing foliation requires dilation and associated work against normal stress. The relationship between rock fabric orientation and frictional strength evolution that we document can explain how incipient faulting and/or flexural slip occur in foliated rock, especially when the orientations of fractures and original fabric vary widely.Foliation and shear fabric are critical factors contributing to long-lasting mechanical weakness in fault zones. Internal fault zone structure is formed concomitant with deformation, and is thus an acquired, evolving characteristic. However, if the protolith has a pre-existing rock fabric, failure and slip in the early stages of faulting could be influenced by strength anisotropy. Such strength anisotropy could be imparted by diagenesis, such as in shales, or due to previous deformation, such as in rocks like schists or mylonites. For example, inherited structure has been used to explain fault slip in situations where the fault is misoriented with respect to the current stress field, i.e. non-Andersonian faults. This includes dormant faults which are later reactivated in an opposite sense (i.e., reverse faults reactivated as thrusts and vice versa) ( Slip on pre-existing foliation is common during folding. A simple example is bedding-parallel slip that occurs in fold limbs ( Previous studies have measured the compressional strength of foliated or fractured rocks in triaxial configurations, showing that strength is lowest when the fabric is oriented ∼30° to Experimental friction studies in which foliated rock or gouge is sheared have focused primarily on foliation that is aligned parallel to the shear direction. These studies have shown that fault-parallel fabric can significantly reduce strength, even when the proportion of intrinsically weak minerals is limited ( Here, we measure the frictional strength of a foliated rock, specifically Pennsylvania black slate, at low shear strain ( We conducted experiments in a biaxial shearing apparatus to measure the evolution of shear strength with displacement under controlled normal stress and sliding velocity (e.g. In each experiment, the sample was sheared initially at a constant velocity of 11 μm/s and to total displacements of 21.5–26.5 mm (as recorded at the gouge boundary) which resulted in bulk engineering shear strains of We report values of the apparent coefficient of sliding friction The measured shear stress In the post-peak portion of the test after attainment of residual sliding friction, we quantify the response of friction to step-wise increases in load point velocity from Following the friction tests, samples were removed from the forcing blocks of the double direct shear configuration and impregnated with epoxy (Buehler EpoThin The friction-displacement behavior for the slate samples is typical of fault materials, with a period of quasi-elastic loading followed by yielding, a peak stress and strain weakening (e.g., We observe that the frictional strength of our slate samples varies significantly at low strain ( The apparent coefficient of friction at failure (peak friction) ranges between 0.34 and 0.56 ( We find that shear strength correlates strongly with changes in layer thickness. In a typical experiment, the layer compacts and thins as the shear stress increases upon initial loading ( We adopt the nomenclature of When the original foliation is oriented 15–45° from the shear direction, foliation-parallel fractures are apparent throughout the samples ( As the foliation orientation increases to 60–90°, these wide, R1-oriented zones of deformation become larger, and tend to have sharper, more planar boundaries oriented at 30° ( Samples with foliation oriented ≥105° display similar characteristics to those with foliations of 60–90°, however little to no rotation of the outer spectator regions occurs ( A consistent result from existing triaxial compression studies on foliated rock is that compressive strength decreases as foliation angle decreases from 0° to the maximum compressive stress We observe increasing failure strength as the original rock foliation orientation increases from 0 to 45° with respect to the shear direction ( We observe what appears to be anomalous frictional behavior for fabric at 75° to the shear direction, and to a lesser extent for samples with fabric 60° to the shear direction. This unusual stress-strain behavior includes a large drop in friction following an initial peak ( At higher strains, after residual friction values are reached, the mechanical behavior is very different from that observed for lower strains ( Measurements of thinning rate during shear provide further evidence that the strength and structure of faults is controlled by the fabric of the actively shearing zone. At low strains (during initial failure), thinning rates are slightly larger at orientations ≤60° compared to ≥75°, which we suggest is the result of sliding on favorably oriented fabric at low orientations. This pattern of dependence of the thinning rate Our results indicate that protolith and initial fault zone fabric play a significant role in determining frictional behavior and microstructural development of foliated fault rocks. These effects are expected to be greatest for low strain and immature faults forming in a foliated protolith. Our study extends several recent works that used a similar experimental configuration to investigate intact, foliated rocks and specifically the effect of foliation parallel to the shear direction (0°) ( One example where pre-existing foliation is important during the deformation process is flexural slip during folding ( We show that in wide shear zones with an inherited microstructure, shear deformation is accommodated by both incipient shear planes and pre-existing fabric. In mature faults with large offset, the original foliation would eventually be destroyed by comminution, textural overprinting, and authigenic mineral growth. It is unclear how much strain is necessary to fully eradicate the influence of pre-existing fabric, however this is likely to occur when slip becomes fully concentrated on boundary or Y-shears, when deformation in the rest of the fault zone is not necessary to accommodate further offset. Dynamic rupture is also expected to be a factor in resetting fabric evolution in shear zones. Brecciation, fracture branching and dynamic, process-zone strain gradients are likely to erase or significantly modify fault zone fabric ( Earthquakes can be generated by foliation-parallel slip ( We show experimentally that pre-existing foliation in any orientation can lower the residual shear strength of rock, and that at very low shear strain the specific orientation can have a strong influence on failure strength and microstructural development. We present microstructural observations indicating that foliation-parallel slip, foliation-perpendicular fracturing, low-porosity compacted zones, active rotation, and wide through-going cataclastic zone formation are highly dependent on the pre-existing foliation orientation. We find that patterns in failure strength can generally be explained by considering whether the fabric is favorably or unfavorably oriented with respect to principal stress axes that have rotated to be 45° from the remotely applied stresses, rather than the shear direction itself. However, at higher strains through-going zones of deformation zones develop in the R1 orientation, which results in an apparent residual strength that is generally independent of the foliation orientation, but still lower than that of powdered slate. The development of these zones coincides with high measured rates of thinning and occur at higher strain when deformation is accommodated by large through-going cataclastic zones. We suggest that at high strains, the pre-existing foliation becomes less important, however the presence of any foliation still reduces the apparent fault strength. We thank Peter Zavalij for XRD analysis, Sam Haines for XTG measurement, and Chris Spiers for helpful discussions. We also thank two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments that improved this manuscript. This work was partially supported by a