Background
                  Elevated lipoprotein(a) (Lp[a]) is associated with aortic stenosis (AS). Oxidized phospholipids (OxPL) are key mediators of calcification in valvular cells and are carried by Lp(a).
               
                  Objectives
                  This study sought to determine whether Lp(a) and OxPL are associated with hemodynamic progression of AS and AS-related events.
               
                  Methods
                  OxPL on apolipoprotein B-100 (OxPL-apoB), which reflects the biological activity of Lp(a), and Lp(a) levels were measured in 220 patients with mild-to-moderate AS. The primary endpoint was the progression rate of AS, measured by the annualized increase in peak aortic jet velocity in m/s/year by Doppler echocardiography; the secondary endpoint was need for aortic valve replacement and cardiac death during 3.5 ± 1.2 years of follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  AS progression was faster in patients in the top tertiles of Lp(a) (peak aortic jet velocity: +0.26 ± 0.26 vs. +0.17 ± 0.21 m/s/year; p = 0.005) and OxPL-apoB (+0.26 ± 0.26 m/s/year vs. +0.17 ± 0.21 m/s/year; p = 0.01). After multivariable adjustment, elevated Lp(a) or OxPL-apoB levels remained independent predictors of faster AS progression. After adjustment for age, sex, and baseline AS severity, patients in the top tertile of Lp(a) or OxPL-apoB had increased risk of aortic valve replacement and cardiac death.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Elevated Lp(a) and OxPL-apoB levels are associated with faster AS progression and need for aortic valve replacement. These findings support the hypothesis that Lp(a) mediates AS progression through its associated OxPL and provide a rationale for randomized trials of Lp(a)-lowering and OxPL-apoB-lowering therapies in AS. (Aortic Stenosis Progression Observation: Measuring Effects of Rosuvastatin [ASTRONOMER]; NCT00800800)Aortic stenosis (AS), the most common form of valve disease in the western world, afflicts >1 million individuals in North America Mendelian randomization analyses have identified the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs10455872 at the Oxidized phospholipids (OxPL) are proinflammatory and proatherogenic Experimental studies have reported the presence of oxidized low-density lipoprotein (LDL), which is enriched in OxPL, in aortic valves explanted from surgery and suggested that it is directly involved in pathophysiological processes leading to AS development A unifying hypothesis can be proposed that Lp(a) mediates AS through its content of OxPL. In this analysis of the ASTRONOMER (Aortic Stenosis Progression Observation: Measuring Effects of Rosuvastatin) trial, we tested the hypothesis that Lp(a) and OxPL-apoB are associated with hemodynamic progression of AS and AS-related events. The design of the ASTRONOMER trial ( Clinical and Doppler echocardiographic data were previously described ( Fasting plasma samples were collected and stored at —80°C. Plasma levels of glucose, creatinine, total cholesterol, LDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, triglycerides, and apoB were measured using automated techniques standardized with the Canadian reference laboratory. LDL-C was corrected for the cholesterol content in Lp(a) using the following formula: corrected LDL-C = LDL-C – Lp(a) mass in mg/dl × 0.3 The primary outcome variable was the progression rate of valve stenosis measured as annualized changes in V Continuous data were expressed as mean ± SD and were tested for normality of distribution and homogeneity of variances with the Shapiro-Wilk and Levene tests, respectively. Lp(a) and OxPL-apoB plasma levels were reported as median (interquartile range). Continuous data were compared with the unpaired Student Baseline clinical, laboratory, and Doppler echocardiographic characteristics are presented ( During the mean follow-up of 3.5 ± 1.2 years, patients in the top Lp(a) or OxPL-apoB tertiles had significantly faster stenosis progression compared with those in the middle and bottom tertiles (Lp[a]: +0.26 ± 0.26 m/s/year vs. +0.17 ± 0.21 m/s/year; p = 0.005) ( On multivariable analyses adjusted for age, sex, hypertension, smoking history, metabolic syndrome, systolic blood pressure, statin use, corrected LDL-C, apoB, creatinine, bicuspid aortic valve phenotype, aortic valve calcification score, baseline V Patients in the top tertile of Lp(a) (OR: 2.1; 95% CI: 1.2 to 3.8; p = 0.009) or OxPL-apoB (OR: 2.0; 95% CI: 1.1 to 3.5; p = 0.02) had a higher risk of being rapid progressors (i.e., annualized progression rate of V The analysis of annualized progression rate of aortic valve area and the assessment of the relationship between OxPL-apo(a) and AS progression rate provided consistent results ( There was a significant interaction between patient age and Lp(a) (p = 0.04) ( After similar multivariable adjustment used in the overall group except for age and smoking history, both top tertiles of Lp(a) (beta coefficient: 0.35 ± 0.06; p = 0.003) and OxPL-apoB (beta coefficient: 0.35 ± 0.06; p = 0.002) remained independent predictors of faster AS progression rate in patients age ≤57 years. Among those age ≤57 years, patients in the top Lp(a) or OxPL-apoB tertiles were at higher risk of being rapid progressors (all p ≤ 0.01) ( In the subset of patients age ≤57 years, results on aortic valve area progression were similar to those from V There was no significant interaction between the presence of bicuspid and tricuspid valve phenotype and Lp(a) (p = 0.61) ( During the follow-up, 49 AS-related events occurred (47 AVR and 2 cardiac deaths). After adjustment for age, sex, and baseline AS severity, patients in the top Lp(a) tertile (hazard ratio: 2.0; 95% CI: 1.1 to 3.7; p = 0.02) ( There was no significant interaction between randomization status and Lp(a) or OxPL-apoB (p > 0.05) ( This ASTRONOMER trial analysis demonstrates for the first time that elevated OxPL-apoB and Lp(a) levels are independently associated with an increased risk of echocardiographically determined AS progression rate. Furthermore, this faster progression rate translated to a higher need for AVR, which was accentuated in younger patients with elevated OxPL-apoB or Lp(a) levels. The risk of Lp(a) as an independent predictor of the progression of AS could be explained by OxPL-apoB (or OxPL-apo[a]) levels, which primarily reflect the content of OxPL on Lp(a) present in both the lipid phase of Lp(a) and covalently bound to the apoA moiety Recent studies reported that genetically elevated plasma levels of Lp(a) are associated with the presence of AS in the general population None of the previous studies have examined the association between Lp(a) levels and the progression rate of established AS, which is a more relevant clinical endpoint that tracks closely with AS symptoms and ultimately determines the need for AVR. The current study suggests that approximately 4 of 10 patients with AS have elevated Lp(a) levels. It further documents that patients with elevated levels of Lp(a) and OxPL-apoB have approximately a 2-fold risk of being rapid progressors. Patients with rapid AS progression represent a conundrum in clinical care because the underlying etiology of the progression is often not clear and they require AVR sooner. This study suggests that elevated Lp(a) and/or OxPL-apoB levels may be key contributors to the mechanism of rapid AS progression. Basic investigations have also provided supporting evidence of a role of lipoprotein disorders, oxidation, and inflammation in AS Lp(a) binds OxPL The interaction between age and Lp(a) levels observed in the present study was potent, suggesting approximately 4-fold faster AS progression rate in patients age ≤57 years. This suggests that the pathophysiological mechanisms leading to the development and progression of AS may be explained in part by the fact that, like most genetic risk factors, patients have elevated Lp(a) starting at birth and this manifests in disease earlier in life. The changes in the valves consequent to the changes induced by OxPL lead to calcification and other pathological changes, which dominate the natural history early in life. As patients age, other risk factors add to the risk of Lp(a) and OxPL-apoB; consequently, they may lose some of their independent predictive value. Additionally, other mechanisms may be involved in the older population, including increased dysregulation in mineral metabolism, post-menopausal deficiency in estrogen, and other aging processes Although data from certain animal models, Mendelian randomization, and retrospective clinical studies suggest that LDL-C could be an important initiator of AS, randomized clinical trials failed to demonstrate any significant benefit of aggressive LDL-C-lowering therapy with statins in patients with mild-to-moderate AS. This lack of efficacy of statins in AS could be related to the fact that these trials only targeted older, normocholesterolemic patients and/or that the beneficial effects of statins on stenosis progression rate were counterbalanced by side effects including: 1) worsening of insulin resistance and LDL particle phenotype as previously reported in a post-hoc analysis of the ASTRONOMER trial It is well appreciated that the rate of AS progression is a primary determinant of developing symptoms of severe stenosis and the need for AVR The relatively small number of patients in each subgroup raises the potential risk of type I statistical error. The ASTRONOMER trial was not powered to assess clinical events, such as AVR and death. Furthermore, the top tertiles of Lp(a) or OxPL-apoB were associated with the composite of AVR or cardiac death only after adjusting for baseline AS severity. Hence, these results should only be considered hypothesis-generating pending a larger analysis. The association between statin treatment and increased level of Lp(a) should be interpreted with caution given that this is a post-hoc analysis and that there was no significant interaction between Lp(a) or OxPL-apoB plasma levels and statin for AS progression. However, our findings are consistent with previous studies that also reported an association between statins and increased levels of Lp(a) and OxPL-apoB Elevated Lp(a) and OxPL-apoB plasma levels are associated with faster AS progression rate and need for AVR; this association was accentuated in younger patients. This study provides a strong rationale to test Lp(a)-lowering and/or OxPL-apoB-lowering therapies for reducing AS progression and the need for AVR.   The authors thank all of the investigators of the ASTRONOMER study (listed in the  For supplemental Methods and Results sections, figures, and a complete list of investigators, please see the online version of this article.