Grinding-related parameters of blast furnace slag cements (BFC), such as Bond grindability, specific rate of breakage and breakage distributions were determined employing separate and intergrinding modes. Strength tests were performed on mortar specimens made by BFC prepared by these modes of grinding to the same fineness. Overall results favor the use of separate grinding mode in view of lower specific energy consumption, ease of manufacture, higher addition of slag on top of more flexible product quality arrangement.Since the first discovery of cementitious properties of blast furnace slag (BFS) by Emil Langen in 1862 and particularly after the oil crisis in 1970s, manufacture of blast furnace slag cement (BFC) has substantially increased due to greater emphasis on energy conservation, utilization of waste materials and certain technical advantages over ordinary Portland cement (OPC), such as higher resistance to aggressive conditions. Today, BFC accounts for nearly 15% of all cement used in Western Europe Turkey is one of the leading manufacturers of cement and steel in Europe, producing around 35 Mt of cement and 13 Mt of crude steel annually BFC has been traditionally produced by intergrinding cement clinker with slag in tube mills. A recent and more popular concept is to grind clinker and slag separately and mix them according to market requirements. Separate grinding can be performed in vertical mills, roller presses and even Horomills as well as tube mills which still remain as the main milling system in cement grinding In recent years, there have been some interests in studies to compare the intergrinding and separate grinding of BFC, and various advantages/disadvantages of each mode have been put forward In this paper, the results of kinetic tests will be given as a summary for it will be subject of another paper. Strength tests on BFC produced by separate grinding gave higher values for 2, 7 and 28 days as compared to the BFC produced by simultaneous grinding to the same Blaine specific surface. Based on overall results, it was concluded that separate grinding should be preferred in view of lower specific energy consumption, ease of manufacture, higher addition of slag (i.e., less environmental hazards) on top of higher flexibility in product quality arrangement according to market requirements. Clinker and slag samples were obtained from Oysa-Iskenderun cement grinding plant. They were characterized for their chemical, mineralogical and mechanical properties by XRF, XRD, SEM and Bond grindability tests. XRF analysis are given in XRD results shown in The ball mill grindability tests were conducted in a standard Bond mill for 90-μm test sieve. As received, the slag was finer and hence the clinker was also reduced down to similar fineness by crushing in a roll crusher and −3.36 mm samples were used as feed materials for the tests. Grindabilities of various blends of clinker and slag were also determined. The Bond grindability test procedure is well documented in the literature and hence the repetition is avoided here The kinetic characterization of grinding involves two functions, namely breakage rate and breakage distribution. Breakage rate function refers to the disappearance rate of individual particle size fraction while breakage distribution defines how the broken fragments are distributed among the finer fractions. For batch grinding, both functions can be determined experimentally by carrying out kinetic tests. For a given size fraction the rate or specific rate of breakage, As The kinetic tests were conducted in a standard Bond ball mill under standard conditions on four monosize fractions of clinker and slag samples, namely −2.8+2.0; −2.0+1.4, −1.0+0.71, and −0.71+0.05 mm fractions, and on their various mixtures having 20%, 35%, 50%, 65% and 80% slag. The monosize fractions were prepared by roll crushing followed by Russel screening. Fractions separated by Russel screening were further hand screened in Tyler sieves to have at least 95% of the material in the specified monosize fractions The product size distribution from a mono feed size at a short grinding time (0.25 min) was used to determine the breakage distribution function, The mortar specimens of OPC and BFC with varying slag content and fineness were prepared according to the Rilem–Cembureau method in a laboratory of 20±2%°C and 50±5% relative humidity. Test specimens were of 40×40×140 mm in size, and following demolding after 24 h, were kept in water until they were broken. The results of Bond grindability tests are given in Kinetic behavior of clinker, slag and their mixtures having 20% and 50% slag are graphically presented in However, intergrinding the mixtures resulted in mostly non-first-order breakage rate. This is the expected behavior when two materials exhibit independence when they are interground. As expected, larger deviations from first order occurred in size fractions at which clinker and slag had most divergent Experimental breakage distribution functions for clinker, slag and their mixtures having 20%, 50% and 80% slag are shown in Variation of breakage distributions for various feed sizes of clinker, slag and of their various mixtures are presented in When the results of Bond grindability and kinetic tests are compared, the striking point is the fact that the clinker, which has a higher Bond grindability, has lower specific rate of breakage within the size range studied. This gives an impression that the two results are contradictory. A close evaluation of the available data provides some explanation for such behavior. First, the specific rate of breakage for both materials become very similar at the finest fractions studied. If the breakage function curves are extrapolated towards the fine-size range, the two curves may be expected to intercept reversing the position of the two materials. The two sets of specific rate of breakage data were fitted separately to a commonly used breakage rate function given in The parameters of the function, Secondly, as shown by the primary breakage distributions Strength tests were conducted in order to evaluate the effect of following parameters on strength properties of the cements: - slag ratio, - slag fineness, - separate and simultaneous grinding.  Another significant point can be reached when the strength values for the two BFC each having 50% slag and 3000 cm To verify this argument, weight fractions retained on 38- and 45-μm sieves were determined by Alpine sieving apparatus for BFC samples interground and separately ground to 3000 cm Particle size distributions for the clinker and slag ground separately to 3000 cm Based upon evaluation of the results following conclusions can be drawn. - Clinker and BFS have considerably different grindabilities, with the slag being harder to grind. - Clinker and BFS have differences in their grinding kinetics, with the clinker having lower rate in coarse fractions and probably higher rate in fine fractions as compared to slag. - Breakage distribution values for clinker and slag are normalizable and non-normalizable, respectively. - Bond grindabilities of mixtures are lower than the weighed average of the grindabilities of the components for all slag additions. This indicates that the specific grinding energy per specific surface necessary to produce BFC is greater when the components are interground. - Slag being harder than clinker gives relatively narrow size distribution when it is ground to the same fineness. - In case of intergrinding, slag having lower grindability accumulates in coarser fractions; with the clinker having higher grindability accumulates in finer fractions. - Interground BFC has lower strength values, particularly at late curing ages compared to BFC produced by separate grinding to the same Blaine fineness. - The increasing amount of slag has a detrimental effect in the strength of BFC when fineness is kept constant. - When BFC is produced by separate grinding, increase in slag fineness improves the strength while the clinker fineness is kept constant. The author wishes to acknowledge the valuable assistance given by the Turkish Cement Manufacturers Association and Italcementi Ankara Works. The financial support provided by the Turkish Cement Manufacturers Association and their permission to publish this study are greatly appreciated.