Photodegradation/mineralization (TiO2/UV Light) of the hydrocarbons: p-nitrophenol (PNP), naphthalene (NP) and dibenzothiophene (DBT) at three different reactors: batch bench reactor (BBR), tubular bench reactor (TBR) and tubular pilot-plant (TPP) were kinetically monitored at pH=3, 6 and 10, and the results compared using normalized UV light exposition times. The results fit the Langmuir–Hinshelwood (LH) model; therefore, LH adsorption equilibrium constants (K) and apparent rate constants (k) are reported as well as the apparent pseudo-first-order rate constants, 
                        
                           
                              
                                 k
                              
                              
                                 obs
                              
                              
                                 ′
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     =
                     kK/(1+
                     Kcr
                     ). The batch bench reactor is the most selective reactor toward compound and pH changes in which the reactivity order is: NP>DBT>PNP, however, the catalyst adsorption (K) order is: DBT>NP>PNP at the three pH used but NP has the highest k values. The tubular pilot-plant (TPP) is the most efficient of the three reactors tested. Compound and pH photodegradation/mineralization selectivity is partially lost at the pilot plant where DBT and NP reaches ca. 90% mineralization at the pH used, meanwhile, PNP reaches only 40%. The real time, in which these mineralization occur are: 180min for PNP and 60min for NP and DBT. The mineralization results at the TPP indicate that for the three compounds, the rate limiting step is the same as the degradation one. So that, there is not any stable intermediate that may accumulate during the photocatalytic treatment.TiO Under conditions of TiO In recent years, effort have been oriented to the oxidation of synthetic environmental wastes using the TiO In Eq. Competition for the active sites on the catalyst surface between reactants and intermediates formed during the reaction, introduces sorption variable for each compound on Eq. However, the concentration of intermediates is negligible in comparison with the reactants; therefore, intermediates terms in Eq. In this work, photocatalytic TiO The following reactants were used without further purification: A solar simulator, Solar Light Co. model LS 1000 UV fitted with a 1000 Irradiation with solar light at the TPP reactor for 3 In a 2.0 A suspension of 1.0 The pilot-plant scale reactor was built using a flow quartz tubular reactor (7 Mineralization during the photocatalytic oxidation of organic pollutants studied was followed by measuring the OCD (oxygen chemical demand). In a typical sample a reaction aliquots (3 In order to normalize data collected at different light intensity and exposition time Eq. In Eq. Classical kinetic analysis was made using the concentration of species during the reaction as function of the normalized illumination time. The absorbance of each aliquot was transformed to concentration using calibrations curves previously prepared (Lambert–Beer law). The Langmuir–Hinshelwood rate constants k and the adsorption equilibrium constants The reported We have followed UV Light photocatalysis degradation and mineralization of   At pH LH parameters The results at each reactor can be summarized as follows: At the tubular pilot-plant (TPP), NP and DBT degrade with equal efficiency ( At the tubular bench reactor (TBR), NP degrades ( The batch bench reactor (BBR), NP degrades faster than DBT and PNP at the three pH used with According to the mineralization results ( Although, pollutants reactivity toward photodegradation/mineralization has been improved, degradation selectivity toward pH and compound used is partially lost as a consequence of the high reactivity at TPP. This selectivity lost may be a problem for instance when surfactants are used to solubilized pollutants in water and the surfactants degradation must be avoided ( The tubular pilot-plant (TPP) is the most efficient of the three reactors tested in this work when photodegradation rate constants and mineralization yield are normalized to effective 30 We are grateful to Laboratorio de Sistemas de Desarrollo Modelos y Prototipos at Universidad Simón Bolívar for the construction of the pilot-plant scale and to