Fractures of the distal humeral lateral condyle are rare injuries in the adult, accounting for approximately 5% of fractures of the distal humerus. For displaced fractures, especially those involving the articular surface, reduction and internal fixation remain the goal in order to allow early motion while ensuring stability. A 41-year-old right hand–dominant man was involved in a motor racing accident. The force of impact drove the transmission through the floorboard, striking his right elbow. He had an isolated elbow injury at presentation. Neurological and vascular examination of the upper extremity was normal;however, there was a small open wound overlying the lateral epicondyle and capitellum. Radiographs revealed a comminuted, displaced fracture of the lateral condyle, a slightly displaced medial epicondylar avulsion fragment, and an intact lateral trochlear ridge (Figure 1). Postoperatively, the arm was placed in a thermoplastic splintfor protection for 4 weeks. During this time, early active full range of elbow flexion-extension and forearm rotation was encouraged. At 19 months' follow-up, his flexion arc was from 5° to 135° with pronation of 75° and supination of 85°. Radiographs demonstrated a congruent ulnohumeral joint and an intact lateral trochlear ridge (Figure 2). A 70-year-old man sustained an open isolated grade III right elbow injury while operating a single-man compact hydraulic excavator (Bobcat machine, Bobcat, West Fargo, ND). There were large wounds over the lateral and medial elbow measuring 15 and 10 cm, respectively. During initial irrigation and debridement, the comminuted lateral condylar fracture fragments were found to be free of all soft-tissue attachments and were therefore excised. The comminuted fracture included a portion of the lateral trochlear ridge. A small segment (approximately 30%) of a fractured radial head was also removed. Medially, the ulnar nerve was contused but in continuity. The medial collateral ligament and joint capsule were intact. A transverse olecranon fracture was addressed with tension-band fixation, although some loss of the proximal ulnar articular continuity was noted (Figure 3). He underwent subsequent repeat irrigation and debridement on the second and fifth postinjury days. Wound coverage with a split-thickness skin graft (approximately 4 × 5 cm) was performed over a bed of granulating muscle and soft tissue overlying the remaining lateral distal humerus and proximal ulna. Postoperatively, the patient was progressed with a supervised physical therapy program. Radiographs at the 30-month follow-up visit showed lateral translation and proximal migration of the ulna relative to the humerus (Figure 4). The optimal treatment for displaced intra-articular fractures remains anatomic reduction combined with stable internal fixation. There are situations in which complete joint reconstruction is not possible. These two cases illustrate such a presentation. The lateral condylar fragments were believed to be unfixable and were, therefore, excised. This allowed for a relatively aggressive postoperative protocol with emphasis on early motion. There are several concerns with regard to the excision of the lateral distal humeral condyle. The triangular concept of the elbow relies on both a medial and lateral column supported at the base by the central trochlea. Isolated lateral column fractures are primarily a fracture of childhood. Milch Little has been written, however, on isolated lateral condylar fractures in the adult (Muller AO classification B2 The overall result after lateral condylar excision is dependent on several factors. These include (1) a competent medial collateral ligament, (2) an intact forearm interosseous ligament, and (3) an intact lateral trochlear ridge. The competency of the medial collateral ligament can be confirmed intraoperatively by direct examination of the ligament or by fluoroscopic imaging with a valgus stress applied to the elbow. In both of our patients the carrying angle remained stable. Excision of the lateral condyle in our two patients is analogous to a radial head excision, dependent on an intact medial collateral ligament for valgus elbow stability and an intact forearm interosseous ligament for longitudinal forearm stability. In most cases we recommend fixation of a lateral condylar fracture that is amenable to fixation. However, in these two cases with a comminuted lateral condylar fracture not amenable to fixation, lateral condylar excision allowed initiation of early elbow motion, thereby decreasing the potential for stiffness and presumably optimizing the overall clinical outcome.