Single-crystalline BaMoO4 microcrystals with uniform shuttle-like morphology have been successfully prepared via a facile aqueous solution mineralization process at room temperature. It was found that the pH value and the reaction temperature had important influences on the formation of the BaMoO4 microcrystals. The shuttle-like microcrystals can be obtained in alkaline aqueous solution (pH=9–14), and when the pH value was adjusted to 6–7, cocoon-like microcrystals appeared. A possible two-stage growth process has been proposed, and the Ostwald ripening was responsible for the formation of the shuttle-like BaMoO4 microcrystals. The products were characterized by XRD, XPS, FESEM, HRTEM and Raman spectroscopy. Room-temperature photoluminescence indicated that the as-prepared BaMoO4 microcrystals had a strong blue emission peak centered at 438nm.Molybdates of relatively large bivalent cations (ionic radius >0.99 As to the BaMoO In recent years, a room-temperature aqueous mineralization process has been developed, which required mild reaction conditions under normal atmospheric pressure, ideally, mimicking the natural mineralogical or biological process conditions In this paper, we demonstrate a facile room-temperature aqueous solution mineralization process to prepare the uniform shuttle-like BaMoO All the chemicals (of analytical grade) are purchased from Shanghai Chemical Regent Company, and used without further purification. In a typical procedure, 0.5 The phase and purity of the products were examined by X-ray powder diffractometer using an X’Per PRD SUPER with Cu  BaMoO The purity and the composition of the product were further investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The peak at about 780.05 The morphology and dimension of the as-prepared products for 6 It was found that the pH had an important role in the crystallization and shape control of BaMoO In addition, the reaction temperature also plays a key role in the formation of shuttle-like BaMoO To substantially understand the growth process of the shuttle-like BaMoO In general, two classical crystal growth modes have been often used to explain the growth process of inorganic materials: one is the so-called Ostwald ripening Based on the XRD and the FESEM measurements, we proposed that the process for the formation of the shuttle-like BaMoO The second stage is the evolution process from the bipyramidal-like particles to the shuttle-like microcrystals. The PL spectrum of the as-synthesized product was investigated at room temperature. As shown in In summary, shuttle-like BaMoO This work is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 20431020) and the 973 Project of China (No. 2005CB623601). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 