Industrial minerals play an important role in the Norwegian mining industry. The presented research focuses on defining marble deposit variability in order to evaluate parameters that can potentially be related to downstream process performance. Two types of marble raw material (K2 and K5) from the Verdalskalk open pit, used for precipitated calcium carbonate production (PCC) were tested for possible differences within texture, grain boundaries shape, grain size, accessory mineral assemblage. Additionally, surface hardness was measured using the Proceq Equotip 3 D device. K5 type was found to be finer-grained compared to K2. The presence of quartz was more pronounced in K2 type material, which possessed higher surface hardness values and presented higher variation of those.With growing needs for ores and industrial minerals it has become essential to aim at constant improvement in recognition of the deposits and commodities not only in the geological but also mineral processing sense. Chemical analysis and geological mapping are the main tools used to classify the raw material into different types and qualities. The presented study aims to recognize, describe and quantify mineralogical and textural properties of a calcite marble deposit and define parameters that can be used for qualifying the deposit into different geometallurgical domains. The specific objectives of this research are: to describe and compare the mineralogical and textural properties of two types of marble used for Precipitated Calcium Carbonate (PCC) production to present and compare surface hardness test results for both types of marble to define potential links between surface hardness values and the mineralogical and textural properties to verify the appropriateness of the Equotip 3 D as a portable time- and cost efficient geometallurgical test tool for surface hardness measurement in marble deposits. The Tromsdalen deposit operated by Verdalskalk AS is located in Mid-Norway. The deposit, being low metamorphic grade calcitic marble of the Ordovician period, is estimated to be 7.5 billion tonnes. The marble unit is situated between greenschist and phyllite units ( The Tromsdalen marble is fine to medium grained, greyish with lighter and darker bands ( The marble is mined in an open pit operation. Based on chemical data as well as physical appearance (color), the deposit is subdivided into 6 marble types ( The A (pure) quality consists of types K1, K2 and K5 and is used as raw material for the burned and slaked lime production. The blasts consisting of blended pure and impure marble (e.g. K2 and K3) are classified as B (standard) quality and used as feed to a kiln operated by a different company with lower purity standards. The lower purity K3 and K4 type raw material is used for cement production (C quality). Type K6 occurs as a thin strata on a contact with a greenschist unit and is not utilized in production due to high impurity levels (Ruiz J.R., pers.com, 06.03.2015). The raw material of pure quality is crushed and screened at the mine site before it is transported by truck to the kiln, where it is converted to quicklime (burned lime, CaO), which is the main product from the mine. The CaO is used for PCC production. The crushing plant at the mine site consists of roller crushers with primary and secondary crushing lines. Crushed products are screened to the 30–100 mm fraction, which is then fed to the kiln. At Verdalskalk the calcium oxide is produced in a two-shaft Maerz kiln due to the reaction: CaCO Currently, marble types K2 and K5 are fed directly to the kiln. They both are of equally high purity but there is an indication, based on operator experience, that marble type K2 has less stable processing performance in the kiln than marble type K5. With similar geochemical data between marble types K2 and K5, there is a need for understanding which mineralogical parameters other than bulk geochemistry influence the kiln performance. Hence it is reported ( The current research is a part of the project aiming at incorporating the aspects of geometallurgy into industrial mineral operations. Typically, geometallurgy is used in metal mining. However, it can be also used for better recognition of process performance and quality needs within industrial minerals. The main goal of this study is to define new key performance indicators (KPIs) within industrial mineral mining, establishing the links between them and “traditional” indicators such as chemistry, and searching for geometallurgical tests that are suitable for industrial minerals operations. The sampling campaign for the microscopic study was performed in the Tromsdalen calcite marble deposit in the blast piles after production blasting. Material from four production blasts, VB11-2016, VB13-2016, VB16-2016 and VB19-2016 was tested and 9 samples were collected from each blast ( Blasts of two different marble types – K2 and K5, both used as a raw material for the kiln, were selected for the study. For the surface hardness measurements, the sampling areas were selected among the largest, stable blast fragments ( A total amount of 110 sample surfaces from 10 separate production blasts were tested ( One polished thin section was prepared from each rock sample. The samples were cut perpendicularly to existing foliation and thin sections were prepared at the Warsaw University (UW). The petrographic and mineralogical investigations of the thin sections were conducted at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU) in Trondheim. A Nikon Eclipse 600 polarized light microscope with a 2 MP digital optical camera was used to record transmitted and reflected light observations. Grain measurements were performed manually using SPOT software. The equivalent circle diameters were measured and the typical grain size within a thin section was estimated based on this. A Scanning electron microscope (Hitachi SU-6600 LV-FE-SEM with Bruker XFlash detector) was applied to chosen thin sections to identify the minerals by backscattered electron imaging (BSE) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), with use of Bruker Quantax Esprit software. MinDat website was used to confirm mineral ID and composition. The blasted material from the ten blasts was tested for surface hardness using a rebound hardness tester. In the test conducted by a Proceq Equotip 3 D device the impact body is propelled by spring force against the tested specimen. Surface deformation results in energy loss, which is detected by measuring and comparing the velocities of the impact body in both impact and rebound phases. The hardness value is expressed as the Leeb Number ( The original method by Aoki and Matsukura proposes a set of 20 readings per surface. However, the present research was conducted under field conditions and the even and smooth surfaces were not always large enough to conduct 20 measurements. For the same reason, there was a high chance of error readings, and therefore the authors decided to reduce the amount of readings from 20 to 10, and reduce the amount of valid readings to the three highest, assuming that an Equotip reading cannot be too high, but can be lowered due to the surface not being perpendicular to the force vector. Hence, the only possible mistakes are lower values rather than higher values. For the blasts VB11-2016, VB13-2016, VB16-2016 and VB19-2016 the sampling areas were following the mineralogical sampling pattern ( Calcite was the major mineral in all samples. The typical grain size of all samples was within a range of 50–400 μm ( Almost all samples presented heteroblastic (recrystallized calcite grains were of different size within a thin section) texture ( The microcrystalline fraction was usually pronounced as rims between porphyrooblasts boundaries but the amount of this, as well as the size range of this fraction varied from sample to sample and could vary considerably within a sample. Grain boundary shape was similar for all samples and was typically a combination of curved, slightly sutured, embayed and straight grain boundaries, in different proportions. The straight triple junction grain boundaries characteristic for fully recrystallized calcite were not abundant in any sample. Accessory minerals found in thin sections were typically pyrite, graphite, iron hydroxides and quartz. It is important to note that within all thin sections total impurities constituted less than 1% of the mineralogy. Pyrite was the most common impurity mineral and occurred typically as sparse euhedral inclusions within calcite porphyroblasts – in most of the samples ( Mineral iron oxide was present mostly as a pseudomorph after pyrite, of typical pyrite shape ( Silica minerals observed in the samples were quartz and muscovite. The typical size of quartz grains ranged between 50 and 100 μm ( Four of the samples were additionally observed under SEM, and EDS analysis was conducted. Additionally to minerals mentioned above, micro grains of apatite and TiO For compiled mineralogical and petrographic results see Within production blast VB11-2016 typical porphyroblast size varied between 50 and 400 μm in total. Porphyroblasts of less than 100 μm were typical for two thin sections, and porphyroblasts larger than 250 μm were typical for four thin sections. In sample 9-VB11 grains bigger than 400 μm were present. Thin sections from production blast VB16-2016 showed similarities to those of blast VB11 and were generally coarse grained. In four out of nine thin sections the typical size range exceeded 200 μm, and in two of the thin sections was lower than 100 μm. Almost all samples presented heteroblastic texture, and the texture was locally homeoblastic for samples 6-VB16 and 8-VB16. Microcrystalline and cryptocrystalline grains were mostly pronounced in samples 1-VB11, 9-VB11, 1-VB16, 2-VB16, 3-VB16. In sample 3-VB11 and sample 5-VB11 porphyroblasts were surrounded by a matrix of microcrystalline calcite that was the main constituent of the sample. Pyrite was found in almost all samples of K2 type. In most of the samples pyrite crystals were less than 20 μm across. In sample 2-VB11, 6-VB11, 2-VB16 pyrite was very sparse and in sample 9-VB11 and 7-VB11 was absent. Iron oxide mineral was found in five samples within blast VB11-2016, six samples of blast VB16-2016. In sample 9-VB11 Fe-ox was most abundant and the grains were up to 100 μm. Graphite elongated aggregates and layers were observed in one sample of VB11-2016. Quartz grains were observed in five samples of the blast VB-11-2016 and two samples of the blast VB16-2016. The typical size of quartz grains ranged between 50 and 100 μm ( Within blast VB13-2016 typical grain size varied from <50 to 200 μm. For three of the thin sections the typical size was less than 100 μm, and for one thin section typical grain size was larger than 250 μm. Thin sections obtained from the VB19-2016 blast were generally fine-grained, for five out of nine sections the range of typical grain size comprised value lower than 100 μm, but contrary to other blasts, in this set of samples the veins of coarse to very coarse material were present. In sample 7-VB19 only one coarse grained vein was visible, with calcite porphyroblasts of sizes up to 3 mm. In thin slip 9-VB19 there were several veins of coarse calcite, whereas in thin slip 2-VB19 there were several transitions from the coarser grained areas to finer grained areas. Thin section 8-VB19 presented extremely heteroblastic texture with extensive microcrystalline occurrence as well as many areas of coarse material. Microcrystalline and cryptocrystalline grains were mostly pronounced in thin sections from samples 6-VB13, 7-VB13, and most of the thin sections from blast VB19-2016. Pyrite was the found in all K5 type sections. Pyrite occurrence as framboidal aggregates associated with graphitic layers was visible in thin slips related to the blast VB19-2016. Iron oxide was noted in four thin sections within blast VB13-2016 and five sections of blast VB19-2016. Graphite elongated aggregates and layers were observed in one thin section of VB13-2016 blast, and most extensively, in thin slips representing the blast VB19-2016. Quartz grains were observed in one thin section of the blast VB-13-2016 and none of the blast VB19-2016. For comparison of accessory minerals between marble types see The calculated L The average L The standard deviation of each blast’s measurements oscillated between 23.0 and 48.3 ( The measurement uncertainty of each L The majority of the surfaces tested belonged to the K5 type due to better accessibility in the pit during sampling campaigns. The calculated L The standard deviation of L For the type K2 the L The blasts standard deviation oscillated between 28.3 and 48.3 which was the highest value obtained. The average measurement uncertainty was within a range of 14.2 and 23.4 and the lowest uncertainty obtained in the results (14.2) was noted for the blast VB20-2015. It was observed that the type K2 thin sections were in general coarser grained than those of type K5 and for K5 type the fine grained calcite of less than 100 μm was more typical ( Microcrystalline calcite located in-between porphyroblast boundaries was generally pronounced in both types of marble, but blast VB19-2016 contained the most abundant micro- to cryptocrystalline fraction. As stated by Pyrite was present in both types of marble. It was observed in different forms (euhedral, anhedral, disseminated and aggregated) but no trends were observed in terms of changing abundance between marble types. The type K5 marble has been reported by the company to have higher a graphite content, hence the color and name of the type ( The presence of silica minerals was more noticeable in type K2 material as there were seven samples containing quartz and one containing muscovite, compared with only one sample containing quartz within type K5. It is highly possible that silicate minerals which were more abundant in type K2 can make the raw material behave slightly differently in the kiln by forming dicalcium silicate layers ( The Equotip D device was tested as a potential tool for easily-accessible, portable, low-cost geometallurgical testing. The method of testing blocks of raw material instead of drill cores was applied. Overall results were similar for both types of marble and did not vary from type to type in terms of average L All the results showed differences in terms of standard deviation – within a blast as well as within a single L Varying standard deviation is an indicator that some parts of the deposit have less homogenous internal structure. In terms of a blast standard deviation, the highest value was noted for K2 type and lowest for K5 type, but in terms of a single surface average standard deviation the highest value was noted for K5 type and the lowest for K2 type. It can be an indication of the different scale of internal variability of the raw material: while high standard deviation of a blast shows that measurements differed from surface to surface (in different parts of a blast), the high values within a surface represent the variability within a single surface, that is, on a smaller scale. Two process implications of raw material parameters can potentially be interpreted from the Equotip measurements: (1) L The collected data allowed for comparison between mineralogy and the Equotip testing results for blasts VB11-2016, VB13-2016, VB16-2016 and VB19-2016. It is important to note that the link between the results is not direct, as the samples used for thin sections were located in similar places within a blast, but were not the same as the surfaces used for the Equotip testing. For K2 type it appears that the high L Relation between mineralogy and L This study showed significant differences between two marble types that to date have been processed as the same quality. Based on obtained results the following conclusions can be drawn: Thin sections of marble type K5 were generally more fine-grained than those of type K2. Marble type K5 was however not homogenous in terms of grain size, as very fine and coarse grains coexisted within one blast samples. Quartz was observed in thin section more often in type K2 samples than in type K5 samples. Graphite was observed mostly in blast VB19-2016 belonging to K5 type. The grain size and mineralogical differences within marble types indicate the need for revision of the classifying parameters in order to establish new geometallurgical domains that could improve the process performance. The Equotip 3 D measurements showed that K2 type samples reached higher L The K5 type material was on average more variable locally (within tested surfaces of certain blasts). Further Equotip 3 D tests are needed in order to observe possible trends and relations to internal structure of the marble. Further studies of marble textures via use of image analysis and marble behaviour during dissociation via the use of a heating stage microscope are planned for the next part of the research study. This research is funded by the 