In this paper, the principle of gas-solid two-phase atomization methodology for metal powder is demonstrated. A cost-effective production technology for high-quality metal powder was proposed. The morphology, size distribution, microstructure and cooling rate of two-phase atomized 7055Al powder were examined. The experimental results have demonstrated a number of advantages and unique features of gas-solid two-phase atomization in the preparation of metal powders. When the Argon gas pressure P
                     =0.6MPa and iron particle feed rate M′=235.6g·min−1, the mass median diameter (d
                     50) of the 7055Al powder manufactured by two-phase atomization process was 22.8μm, which is reduced by 52.7% compared with gas atomized powders with d
                     50
                     =48.2μm under the same atomization parameters. Experimental results also showed that the gas-solid two-phase atomized powders exhibited more irregular shapes than gas atomized powders. The cooling rate of most powders was in the range of 104–105
                     K/s, and for some extra checked fine powders the cooling rate can even reach 106
                     K/s. The two-phase atomized powders had larger cooling rate and presented obvious rapid solidification characteristics than gas atomized powder with the same diameter. Moreover, this study indicates that gas-solid two-phase atomization could be a promising high-quality and low-cost metal powder preparation technology.Pervasive applications of metal powders promote the rapid development of the powder preparation technology, especially the finely pulverized powders with regular shape in the areas including 3D printing, powder metallurgy, and thermal spray technology In traditional gas atomization process, a stream of liquid metal is disrupted into fine droplets by high-energy gas jets. These atomized droplets are cooled by gas stream to generate spherical powders during free flight To overcome these defects, in this study the solid phase particles were mixed into the atomization gas to form a high-speed gas-solid two-phase flow. The two-phase flow was used as the atomization media to disrupt the liquid metal in the aim of improving the atomization efficiency and refining the powder size. This paper illustrates experiments conducted with ultra-strength 7055Al alloy which were performed through a self-designed gas-solid two-phase atomization facility. The morphology, microstructure and size distribution of the atomized powders were tested. The influences of these parameters are compared with that of traditional gas atomization process. The objectives of this study are to seek an efficient atomization method, and built a better understanding of the principle of gas-solid two-phase atomization process. The experimental facility is illustrated in The gas-solid two-phase atomization medium was generated by a self-designed pressure actuated gas-solid injector as shown in 7055Al alloy was put into the crucible located in the melting chamber, and then was heated to a predetermined temperature in induction furnace. The melting chamber was separated from the atomization chamber by a Laval-type atomizer, as shown in In order to evaluate the atomization effect of gas-solid two-phase atomization, an additional gas atomization experiment with the same atomizer shown in An observation of powders by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out, and the SEM micrographs of the atomized powders are shown in As shown in  In gas-solid two-phase atomization process, with the interaction of Argon gas and iron particles, the powders have smaller sizes than that of gas atomized. As mentioned above, smaller droplet size indicates a more irregular shape, and which is why two-phase atomized powders have more regular morphology. At the same time, the atomization chamber was pre-evacuated prior to the atomization process, and the formation of oxide skins to forestall spherodization was prevented, which is also benefits the generation of spherical powder. Laser particle size analysis is most widely used in determining particle size distribution of metal powder At the same time, the cumulative undersize distribution S-curves calculated based on Laser particle size analysis results is often employed to represent the size distribution of the atomized powders, and  From During the atomization process of the molten metal, the ratio of surface area to volume for atomized droplet is greatly increased compared with the previous molten metal. The atomization process can be considered as an energy transfer process between atomization medium and molten metal to form a large amount of metal surface For the atomization progress with a metal mass flow rate As shown in Plug the experimental data shown in During gas atomization, a high-velocity gas flow impinges on a molten metal flow that breaks the molten metals into droplets through a two-stage process. In the first stage (the primary atomization), the surface of the molten metal is disturbed by sinusoidal oscillation and is subsequently broken into large droplets or unstable bodies called ligaments. Then, in the subsequent stage (secondary atomization), the droplets/ligaments are further disintegrated into flight, either by low-turbulence mechanism or by more chaotic high-turbulence stripping fashion In the gas-solid two-phase atomization process, the disintegration of the molten metal occurs as a result of the kinetic energy transfer from the atomization medium to the metal. In this study, the high velocity iron particles are homogeneously distributed in the gas. As a result, the iron particles are likely to collide with the metal sheet in the primary atomization and droplets in the secondary atomization. The change of kinetic energy during the collision is completely dissipated by the surface energy exchange and the viscous dragging interaction of the molten metal.  During the penetration process, the actual penetration length of the particle is ( Assuming that the net change of the surface energy in the penetrating-out process is equal to that of penetrating-in process, the formulation of this process can be expressed by the Eq. Substitution of Eq. In the secondary atomization stage, the initial velocity The critical penetration velocities of iron particle for different thicknesses of metal sheet (or droplet diameter) are calculated by Eq. It can be seen from In this study, the median size The gas-solid two-phase atomized powders were observed by SEM. When it comes to a rapid solidified microstructure, the secondary dendrite arm spacing (DAS) is an essential parameter for evaluating the microstructure refinement From The cooling rate The relationship between the calculated cooling rate As shown in Interface heat convection between the atomized droplets and cooling medium is the main cooling approach during the atomization process On the right side of Eq. In Eq. In this paper, the principles of gas-solid two-phase atomization process for the production of metal powders were investigated. The influence of solid-phase atomization medium on the final morphologies and size distribution characteristics of atomized droplets was investigated. The secondary dendrite arm spacing was employed to evaluate the cooling rate, and the analytical model was developed to describe the relationship between the cooling rate and powder size. The morphology, size distribution, microstructure s and cooling rate of gas-solid two-phase atomized 7055Al powders were compared with that of gas atomized under the same atomization pressure and gas consumption. The results presented in this paper demonstrate a number of advantages and unique features of gas-solid two-phase atomization in the preparation of metal powders, which are summarized as follows: When the Argon gas pressure Powders produced through gas-solid two-phase atomization had more irregular morphology. And the The gas-solid two-phase atomization equipment can be upgraded from the traditional gas atomization devices by adding a particle feed device. In this paper, results indicate that under the same atomization condition the gas-solid two-phase atomization process can produce finer metal powders, which proves to be a promising high-quality but low-cost metal powder preparation technology. In actual production process, we can select the same solid phase atomization particles as the liquid metal (e.g. Ar-7055Al particles two-phase flow to atomize molten 7055Al alloy), to produce powders without pollution. The financial support of Science and Technology Innovation Foundations of