This study reports on the spectroscopic characterization and antimicrobial potency of polyurethane cyclodextrin co-polymerized phosphorylated multiwalled carbon nanotube-doped Ag-TiO2 nanoparticle (pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO2) bionanosponge nanocomposite. The synthesis of pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO2 bionanosponge nanocomposite was carried out through the combined processes of amidation and polymerization reactions as well as the sol-gel method. The native nanosponge cyclodextrin and phosphorylated multiwalled carbon nanotube–nanosponge CD (pMWCNT-CD) polyurethanes were also prepared, and their antimicrobial activities carried out for comparison purposes. The synthesized bionanosponge polyurethane materials were characterized using Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, Laser Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to give clear information regarding their structural, and dynamic physicochemical properties. The potency tests of the synthesized compounds were carried out against three bacterial strains Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, and two fungal representatives Aspergillus ochraceus and Aspergillus fumigatus, using the disc diffusion method. Micro dilution and agar plating were used to determine the minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) and minimum fungicidal concentration (MFC), respectively. The results obtained revealed that pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO2 exhibits superior antibacterial and antifungal activities when compared to the other bionanosponge polymers tested. Thus, the bionanosponge polyurethane pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO2 nanocomposite can be considered as an active antimicrobial compound (AMC).Cyclodextrins (CDs) are natural cyclic low molecular weight carbohydrate molecules made of small building blocks of monosaccharide glucose units. They originally derive from the hydrolysis reactions of starch [ CDs are also known as versatile materials in the sense that they can be modified using different types of chemical moieties (e.g., a polyfunctional agent) in order to improve their properties and usefulness. For example, the modification of cyclodextrin with different types of cross-linking agents to form nanosponge CDs (NS CDs) cross-linked polymers has been reported [ Various inherent factors have hindered this thorough characterization of bionanosponge polyurethane cyclodextrin nanocomposite. These inherent factors are the presence of a large number of reaction sites on each CD unit [ Additionally, research studies on the biocidal activities (or antimicrobial activities) of bionanosponge polyurethane cyclodextrin nanocomposite are limited, and very few have been reported. Bachir et al. [ It is worth mentioning here that pathogens have different intrinsic properties that affect the biocidal activities of the AMCs. Pathogen strains have specific properties, and the way to kill them or to inhibit their growth is highly connected to their respective intrinsic properties [ In contrast, the Gram-positive bacterial cell wall membrane is simple, and consists of a thick layer of peptidoglycan (PG) fixed to Teichoic acid, which is unique to them [ Herein we use a combination of techniques (XPS, XRD, Raman) to carry out a thorough structural characterization of the developed bionanosponge polyurethane pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO For the synthesis of the bionanosponge polyurethanes, the following chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, South Africa: Hexamethylene diisocyanate (HMDI, 98.0%), Oxalyl chloride, β-CDs (97%), N,N Dimethylformamide (DMF, 99.9%), Diethyl(alpha-aminobenzyl)-phosphonate (97%), Titanium tetraisopropoxide (TTIP), 6-amino-hexanol (97%), 2-propanol and MWCNTs (purity >90%, diam. × L 110–170 nm × 5–9 μm). Silver nitrate (99.8%) was acquired from Rochelle Chemicals, South Africa. For the antimicrobial activity studies, the following materials and chemicals were used in this study: Ringer's tablets were from Merck; Culture tubes, Petri dishes, and 96-well micro plates were obtained from Lasec (Pty) Ltd., South Africa. Dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO) (ACS reagent), RMPI-1640 Medium, Amphotericin B solubilized (antibiotic, control for Fungi) (50 mg), resazurin (dye) and sodium salt were bought from Sigma Aldrich, South Africa. The microorganism strains ( For comparison purposes, native CD nanosponge polyurethane was prepared as described in previous studies [ The functionalization (or the oxidation) of MWCNTs obtained from Sigma Aldrich was carried out by acid treatment as illustrated in previous studies [ The phosphorylation of MWCNT was carried out, as reported in previous studies [ The polymerization of pMWCNTs with β-CDs was performed as described by Mamba and co-workers using hexamethylene diisocyanate (HMDI) as a cross-linker agent [ This synthesis was achieved by the sol-gel process as follows: pMWCNTs-CD polymer (obtained in A Perkin Elmer spectrophotometer (FTIR, spectrum 100) was used to ascertain the presence of functional groups in the bionanosponge polyurethane samples prepared. For the analysis, transparent IR pellets of each sample were prepared by mixing potassium bromide (KBr) with the samples to be analyzed. Raman spectroscopy analysis was employed to confirm the purity, quality, and main characteristic peaks of the bionanosponge CD polyurethane in each sample prepared. It was also used to identify the presence of MWCNT, CD polymer, and TiO X-ray diffraction analyses were conducted to confirm the presence of crystallinity or non-crystallinity in each of the bionanosponge samples prepared. A Rigaku Ultima IV X-Ray (40 kV, 30 mA) diffractometer with copper Kα radiation (wavelength = 0.154 nm) was utilized for the analyses. The analysis conditions consisted of scan speed = 2°/min, step width = 0.02°, scan range = 3–90°. The PDXL software loaded with the ICDD card was used for the data processing. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was performed in order to determine the sample elemental composition and to provide clear details regarding the molecular bonds present in each bionanosponge polyurethane. A SPECS PHOIBOS 150 electron energy analyser, with an Al Kα monochromatised photon source (photon energy hν = 1486.71 eV) was employed at room temperature for XPS measurements. Samples were mounted on the sample holder using conducting carbon tape. The overall energy resolution for XPS measurements was set to 0.5 eV for all the spectra shown here. In order to compensate for the charging of the sample, a low-energy flood gun was used (electron energy = 2 eV, beam current = 20 μA). The 96-well micro plates were already sterile before purchase. All other reagents and materials used were sterilized in an autoclave at 121 °C before usage. The experiments were conducted in a sterilized laminar airflow chamber. A nutrient Media is a solid or liquid substance used for cultivation isolation, identification, and support growth of microorganisms. As it is mostly recommended, the nutrient agar and nutrient Mueller-Hinton broth were used for the antibacterial susceptibility tests whereas the nutrient media employed for antifungal susceptibility tests were potato dextrose agar and RMPI-1640 [ Preparation of Nutrient Broth medium, 16 g of the powder nutrient broth was suspended in 1 L bottle of purified water, dispersed and mixed-well. Then the broth solution in the 1 L bottle was autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min. The sterile broth solution was allowed to cool to 45 to 50 °C and pour into culture tubes for further usage. Preparation of nutrient agar medium, 28 g of the powder nutrient agar was suspended in 1 L bottle of purified water, dispersed and mixed-well. Then the agar solution in the 1 L bottle was autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min. The sterile agar solution was allowed to cool to 45 to 50 °C and pour into Petri dishes to obtained solid nutrient agar media. Preparation of potatoes dextrose agar medium, 65 g of the powder medium was suspended in 1 L bottle of purified water. The medium solution in 1 L bottle was heated to boiling for 1 min with frequent agitation until complete dissolution. Then, autoclaved at 121 °C for 15 min, allowed to cool to 45 to 50 °C and pour into Petri dishes or culture tubes for slants. Fresh bacterial cultures were obtained after sub-culturing (24 h incubation) the bacterial strains from sterile agar plates as follow: the strains obtained were activated on Mueller- Hinton broth under aseptic condition and stored in 50% glycerol for future use. The excess was spread on nutrient agar and incubate for 24 h at 27 °C. After that, a single colony was picked using an inoculation loop and suspended in 20 mL Mueller-Hinton broth overnight. This was then used to prepare fresh bacterial cultures as per desired McFarland standard concentration (0.5 McFarland) following Fonkui et al. [ Mature fungi with renewed spores were isolated on the potato agar plate using an inoculation loop full of each fungi sub-culture strain (previously obtained). The inoculums were incubated at 30 °C for seven days. The procedure was as follow: the fungi obtained were further cultured on potatoes dextrose agar by harvesting spores from 21 days fungi cultured using swaps imbibed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS). The plates were incubated for seven days at 30 °C for fresh sporulation. The fresh spores obtained herewith were suspended in PBS and brought to the desired inoculum concentration (1 × 105 spores/mL) using a haemocytometer necessary for the assay as reported by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute [ A 50 μg/mL Amphotericin B solution (an antibiotic used as a control for fungi) was prepared by dissolving a given mass of powder into the DMSO. 0.015% of resazurin dye solution was prepared by weighing 0.015 g of resazurin sodium salt, and dissolving it with 100 mL sterile deionised water, it was stored at 4 °C for a maximum of two weeks The antimicrobial susceptibility tests were all conducted according to the standard methods of antimicrobial susceptibility testing [ For the antibacterial disc diffusion method, the bacteria were cultured in nutrient Muller–Hinton broth until an OD The disc diffusion method for fungal species was similarly done as described above for bacterial species, except that the fresh fungal spores in ringer solution were obtained from seven-day-old fungi grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA). The suspension was diluted in RPMI-1640 medium and standardized with a haemocytometer to obtain a working solution of 1 × 10 For the antibacterial MIC tests, the 96-well microplates were used, and the highest concentration of each AMC was made up in DMSO. Fresh bacterial cultures were harvested from overnight bacterial growth and diluted in nutrient broth to match the 0.5 McFarland standards. Under aseptic conditions, 75 μL of the suspension was then seeded in 96-well plates containing 75 μL of serially diluted test compounds (in duplicate) concentrations of 7000, 3500, 1750, 875, 437.5, 218.8, 109.4, 54.69, 27.34 and 13.67 μg/mL. The nutrient Mueller–Hinton broth was used for dilution purposes. The control was a mixture solution of 75 μL DMSO and 75 μL nutrient Muller–Hinton broth, placed all around the first contour of the micro plates used. The sterility was confirmed by checking the control. The plates were sealed and stacked to avoid evaporation and incubated at 30 °C for 24 h. Live or dead cells were verified by the addition of resazurin dye (0.015%), which, after 3 h of incubation, produced a pink resoforin precipitate or a highly red fluorescent resorufin substance in the presence of viable cells and remained blue in dead cells [ The antifungal MIC tests by micro dilution method on 96-well plates were performed as described above for antibacterial MIC tests. The only differences were the use of RMPI-1640 medium for dilution purposes; the control was a mixture solution of 75 μL DMSO and 75 μL RMPI-1640 medium, placed all around the first contour of the micro plates used. After sealing the plates, they were incubated for 72 h. The addition of resazurin dye showed after 3 h of incubation blue solution in the presence of dead cells and pink resoforin precipitate in the presence of viable cells [ MBCs were determined by sub-culturing on nutrient agar plates. 2 μL of the sample was taken from each well of every MIC micro plate containing dead cells. The observations obtained for the sub-cultures were recorded after 24 h of incubation. MFCs were determined by sub-culturing the fungi on potatodextrose agar plates 20 μL from each well (which remained blue after the addition of resazurin dye) of each MIC micro plate. The growth patterns on the sub-cultured plates were recorded after 72 h of incubation. The developed bionanosponge polyurethane nanocomposite (pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO   The pMWCNT-βCD polymer spectrum ( The spectrum for pMWCNT-βCD/TiO XRD patterns were obtained in order to confirm further the purity and crystallinity of the bionanosponge samples synthesized. The XRD patterns of the native bionanosponge CD and pMWCNT-CD were all similar, and they present only broad, amorphous peaks ( Additionally, from the XRD pattern of pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO XPS analysis was used in this study to evaluate the elemental composition and the electronic state of each element present in the samples. This spectroscopic technique was also employed to provide quantitative information regarding the different functional groups present on the surface of the synthesized bionanosponge materials. From this survey scan, the peaks observed represent the different elements (within each sample) with their chemical electronic state. Si XPS peaks were detected due to the residual silicon vacuum grease, which was applied to the glassware and reaction apparatus before the synthesis reaction. An unexpected fluorine peak was also detected. It could be due to some trace contamination from one of the glassware used during the reaction. In order to obtain detail quantitative information for each sample analyzed, i.e., to determine the different components of each element, high-resolution spectra of the following core levels: P 2p, C 1s, O 1s, N 1s, Ti 2p, and Ag 3d were measured. Fig. B.1 (Supp. Info) shows the P 2p spectrum for the only pMWCNT sample where the phosphorus (P) element was seen on the survey scan. The reader may refer to the supplemental information for further discussion on this core level.  For all the samples analyzed, it was in general complicated to distinguish between components that are due to either C It can be noticed from  From the observations in The binding energies of N 1s components ( From the fit to the spectra of Ti 2p ( In summary, from the above detailed structural characterization using a combination of techniques, it can be depicted that further modification of the native CD nanosponge polyurethane with pMWCNT, TiO The antimicrobial susceptibility tests against three bacterial strains The principle of disc diffusion is based on the diffusion of the antimicrobial compound through the agar pore. When the antimicrobial compound diffuses through the pores of the solid agar medium, it interacts with the microorganism spread on the solid agar medium by inhibiting its growth. This is observed as a clear zone around the disc [ On the other hand, all three tested compounds exhibited no clear zone of inhibition against the studied bacterial and fungal representatives at the tested concentration. Similarly, one also noticed no clear zone of inhibition by amphotericin B against the tested fungal strains. These observations could be due to weak diffusion of the compounds through the pores of the agar medium, resulting from the insolubility of the AMCs in DMSO. Therefore, the antimicrobial test results obtained by the disc diffusion method were not significant enough to make conclusions on the antimicrobial activities of the synthesized polyurethanes (pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO From the results obtained after the micro dilution method (Fig. C.2 Supp. Info), The MIC of these three AMCs against The Gram-positive bacterium The antifungal activity of pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO From the antimicrobial tests, the results obtained have proven that all the three polyurethanes (pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO In order to understand how the antimicrobial activity of the nanomaterials against the microbial species could occur, it is first essential to know what the cell walls of these microbial species are made of (see Appendix C Supp. Info). The cell wall surfaces of these microbial species (bacteria and fungi) possess reactive functional groups such as carboxyl, hydroxyl, amide, phosphonate, and amines. The outermost surface of bacterial cells has also been shown to have negative charges [ Additionally, previous studies have revealed that the antimicrobial activities of nanomaterials against pathogens may result from the interactions between the functional groups or charges on the surface of nanomaterials and membrane cell wall of pathogens [ Structural characterization of the native CD nanosponge, pMWCNT-CD, and modified pMWCNT-CD/Ag-TiO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the Global Excellence and Stature Initiative of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at