Factors influencing the slag equilibrium phosphorous distribution ratio, L
                     p, and the phosphide capacity, C
                     p, of ferromanganese smelting slags under highly reducing conditions were studied at 1500°C. The investigations were conducted by equilibrating slags with the respective ferromanganese alloys contained in graphite crucibles under CO and Ar–CO atmospheres at oxygen partial pressures of 1.22×10−16–7.83×10−19
                     atm at 1500°C. The number and composition of the slag samples were determined using the extreme vertices design method for mixture experiments in order to optimize the experimental work. Analytical results of the final equilibrium slag and metal samples were employed to calculate the L
                     p and C
                     p of SiO2–Al2O3–CaO–MgO–MnO–P2O5 slags in equilibrium with Mn–Fe–Si–Csat–P metal phase. The results were further used to develop empirical models to predict the distribution ratios and phosphide capacities as a function of slag composition. It was established that the L
                     p and C
                     p parameters increased by increasing slag basicity, CaO content and increasing oxygen partial pressure.Low phosphorus manganese ores are depleting fast all around the world and high phosphorus content in the ferromanganese alloys seriously affecting ferromanganese producers. During the smelting of ferromanganese, most of the phosphorus in the charge is transferred to the alloy phase. With strong reducing conditions and high operation temperatures, the removal of the phosphorus from the metal phase becomes difficult in the ferromanganese smelting process. Various methods applicable for reducing phosphorus content in the manganese ores are not considered as technically and economically suitable ( The objective of the study is to determine the factors that affect the phosphide capacity of the slag system and the phosphorus partition between slag and metal phases. The results of this study can be used as an optimization tool for ferromanganese smelting slags. This will help to improve ferromanganese products conformance rate in terms of phosphorus and at the same time reduce the cost of down stream refining processes to remove the phosphorus. The strong reducing conditions prevailing in the ferromanganese smelting process according to the following reaction prevented the excess oxidation of manganese from the melt With respect to the similarities in the chemical properties of iron and manganese elements, and the fact that Fe–Mn liquid solutions at temperatures around 1500 Also by assuming Henrian behavior in the liquid manganese and ideal ionic behavior in the slag, the equilibrium constant of the Eq. The slag samples were prepared as the homogeneous mixtures of pure CaO, MgO, Al The ferromanganese alloy samples were prepared by using electrolytically pure Fe, Mn, Si and spectrographic grade of graphite. The required amounts of the metal components were dried, weighed and mixed homogeneously in an agate mortar. The sample consisting of 6 A vertical molybdenum wire resistance furnace with an alumina work tube was used for the gas-slag-metal equilibration experiments. Molybdenum wire was protected from the oxidation by decomposition of anhydrous ammonia into hydrogen and nitrogen at temperatures above 700 The equilibration time for each run was chosen as 18 The flow rate of gases was 600 The crucibles containing the samples were introduced into the reaction tube by using an alumina pedestal. The reaction tube was first flushed with purified argon that was passed through a deoxidizing furnace containing Cu-chips at 500 According to the analytical results, the slag and metal constituents varied in the following ranges where slag composition is expressed in mole fractions while metal composition is given in mass percentages. Slag Phase: MnO, 0.035–0.146; CaO, 0.181–0.361; SiO Metal Phase: Mn, 62.08–83.92%; Si, 2.29–11.37%; Fe, 6.35–24.94%; C, 2.64–6.30%; P, 0.21–1.60%. The basicity ratio, defined by Eq. Slag Phase: MnO, 0.009–0.024; CaO, 0.286–0.431; SiO Metal Phase: Mn, 63.62–83.71%; Si, 3.75–14.40%; Fe, 5.53–19.43%; C, 2.40–7.02%; P, 0.23–1.31%. The basicity ratio, defined by Eq. The results showed that the partition ratio of phosphorus (Log The effect of silica content on the phosphorus distribution ratio is shown in SiO The change in the amounts of Al The experimental data on the partition of phosphorus between slag and metal phases was modeled from statistical point of view by using SAS software package. Due to the satisfactory results obtained from similar studies, which were conducted on the ferrochromium and ferromanganese slags, the models were designed as quadratic form (   The high correlation coefficient indicates a reliable fit for the regression model, but this type of models should not be used if the slag compositions fall outside the slag composition ranges of this study. Log The data in The quadratic regression models which define the relationship between the phosphide capacities of ferromanganese slags and the slag constituents under CO and Ar–CO atmospheres at 1500   The fits obtained were very good where correlation coefficients were over 0.9 and again this regression model can be used for the prediction of phosphide capacities of the slag system within the slag compositions ranges studied in this research. The CaO and SiO Emprical models were developed for expressing the phosphide distribution ratio and phosphide capacity of of the SiO The authors wish to acknowledge Ferro Alloy Producers Association, for providing the financial assistance for this study.