The aim of the present investigation was to determine the effect of pulsed plasma nitriding process on the wear behavior of an AISI 4140 steel. Wear tests were performed using a ball-on-disc configuration with a linear sliding speed of 0.1 m s−1, 5 N load and 700 m sliding distance. The tests were carried out at room temperature in air, without lubrication, by employing CVD TiN coated balls of 6 mm in diameter. The surface morphology and topography of the wear scars of samples and balls have been determined by using both scanning electron microscopy and three-dimensional stylus profilometry. Different wear mechanisms were detected such as abrasion, adhesion and oxidational wear for the pairs under study. Results have showed an improved wear resistance of the nitrided samples compared to the AISI 4140 steel samples.Plasma nitriding is the most widely used process among the various plasma diffusion treatments, and its characteristics, capabilities and advantages have been recently reviewed The vast amount of the research performed in relation to plasma nitriding processes has been directed towards their optimization in relation to the main coatings properties as uniformity (uniform dispersion of particles), coating roughness, microhardness, corrosion and abrasion wear resistance. However, few studies Most of the results found in the literature regarding the wear sliding wear behavior of plasma nitrided samples are related to experiments which have been using ball bearing steel (AISI 52100) as mating surface This study constitutes part of systematic studies primarily undertaken to optimize the pulsed plasma nitriding process and to determine the relationships between the tribological response and the characteristics of the surface layers, which are specific to each type of set of processing conditions. Samples of 1 mm thick and 2.54 cm in diameter of AISI 4140 steel (0.2–0.3% Mo, 1.65–2.0% Ni, 0.8–0.9% Cr and 0.4% C) were metallographically prepared using standard techniques prior to the nitriding process. The specimens were nitrided in a H Ball-on-disc configuration tribometer was employed to investigate the wear behavior of unitrided and nitrided discs of AISI 4140. The static partners were balls of 6 mm in diameter made of chemically vapor-deposited TiN on 316L stainless steel. The characteristics of the deposition process and the properties of CVD TiN on stainless steel have been reported previously The friction coefficients vs. sliding distance for the tribological pairs under study are represented in As can be observed from The friction coefficient of CVD TiN ball against AISI 4140 steel increased rapidly at the beginning of the test to a value of 0.485 before 400 cycles, followed by a sudden drop to 0.426 at nearly 1000 cycles. During the following cycles until the end of the test, the friction coefficient has a slow increase reaching a final value of 0.526. The increase of friction coefficient with sliding distance is an indication of both transference mechanism coupled with the rupture of the oxide film produced during sliding, which causes the formation of metal–metal contact If the data reported in Scanning electron micrographs in secondary electron mode (SE) of the wear scars morphologies produced on a plasma nitrided disc and corresponding TiN-coated ball are represented in X-Ray elemental mapping has proved to be a very useful tool to interpret the wear mechanism between the mating surfaces. On the other hand, the topography of the plasma nitrided disc represented in By combining the information presented in the above figures with The behavior of two tribological pairs AISI 4140 nitrided and unitrided discs against CVD TiN ball has been studied in ambient air, under unlubricated conditions. It was determined that the nitriding process can improve the wear resistance performance of AISI 4140 steel against TiN ball in the test range of this research. Under given experimental parameters it was determined that the wear mechanism was a combination of adhesion and abrasion mechanisms and their relative amount is dependent on the material characteristics. Mainly abrasive wear was observed for the discs, whereas for the TiN ball the adhesive wear mechanism was predominant. In some small areas of the wear scars of the ball, TiN coating failure was observed due the detachment of microdebris produced as result of the fracture of the TiN grains, local loss of adhesion and the presence of debris originating from the steel substrate. The presence of the compound layer formed during plasma nitriding process has also contributed to the increase in wear and friction coefficient value during the initial stage of the sliding test. Further work is required in order to obtain a general picture of the effect of the N/H The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support received from the Venezuelan National Council for Scientific and Technological Research (CONICIT) through the project S1-96001366 and to the IAEA (research Contract No.RC/6477/RB) and CONICET grants, respectively.