The Bayer process is the hydrometallurgical production of alumina, subsequently used within the chemicals industry and for smelting to aluminium. Bauxite deposits have with time become more problematic to process, frequently containing impurities that build up within the Bayer process liquor, reducing circuit efficiency and requiring dedicated reduction processes. The Bayer Circuit and residue washing processes are based upon the retention of the costly process liquor resulting in some impurities continuing to concentrate till they reach their solubility limits. A counter intuitive method of impurity removal is the export of a Bayer liquor bleed stream and its replacement with clean caustic. The Bayer liquor bleed stream would need to be of sufficient volume to act as an impurity removal process, but what to do with the costly and highly caustic aluminate solution? Following concentration, the Bayer liquor can be exported for utilisation in the production of Bayer derived geopolymers, a possible new construction material. Only the commercial application of the Bayer process liquor would allow the utilisation of the impurity removal process, potentially benefiting both industries.
                  Bayer liquor and fly ash (a coal combustion product) have been utilised to make a new class of ambient-cured construction geopolymers with compressive strength in excess of 30MPa. Industrial synergy allows for the production of Bayer derived flyash geopolymer products of very low embodied energy (concrete binder of 0.27GJ/t) and associated carbon footprint.
                  To establish a Bayer derived geopolymer industry of large enough volume to allow economies of scale, several product markets and applications will be required to generate consistent demand. One such market is to manufacture artificial aggregate from Bayer-derived geopolymer mortars. An artificial aggregate would normally have a high embodied energy however here it has been calculated to be 0.22GJ/t, similar to other manufactured or recycled aggregates. Production rates could be between 0.1 and 10 million tonnes per annum per alumina refinery, depending upon local economics and refinery operational conditions.One of the core considerations of a cyclic hydrometallurgical process is the disposal of gangue mineral residues. The development of Bayer process by-products has been reported by Alcoa of Australia Limited (Alcoa) with development of products such as Red Lime Bauxite deposits may contain organic material which can be dissolved into the liquor as Total Organic Carbon (TOC), adding to the impurity load. The dissolution and oxidation of TOC can consume caustic reducing its availability for the dissolution of alumina. Some organic compounds can act as hydrate precipitation poisons reducing cycle yield. Others, such as oxalate, can co-crystallise with hydrate and cause impurity issues. The presence of TOC can also increase the amount of soda in hydrate product, increase liquor viscosity, increase liquor foaming and decrease hydrate agglomeration. TOC is ultimately partially oxidised within the Bayer circuit to form sodium oxalate which must be removed from the process. Some TOC may be fully oxidised to form carbonates which are removed by the causticisation process. Both processes can be capital and operationally expensive and may not be sufficient to prevent TOC levels elevating within the process. Inorganic impurities are dissolved during the digestion process and have two main impacts on the Bayer circuit. Firstly, inorganic species such as iron, calcium, sulphate and fluoride, in combination, can co-precipitate with gibbsite, resulting in product purity issues. Secondly, some inorganic impurities can recirculate within the Bayer circuit locking their hydroxide counter-ions and reducing the hydroxide available for alumina dissolution. Many of the inorganic species can be removed by the desilication process. Here, reactive silica from bauxite consumes caustic and alumina from solution to form a sodium alumina silicate (DeSilication Product - DSP). DSP can remove sulphate and other impurities from the liquor circuit, but is an expensive process. There are many inorganic species that have no commercial removal processes available. The export bleed of Bayer liquor and replacement with clean caustic is a whole of impurity load removal process. The liquor itself is valuable and disposal would represent a significant additional cost. However, if a market could be found for that liquor bleed stream, then two industries may benefit from the one process. Preparation of a concentrated Bayer liquor feedstock for geopolymer formation may provide that market while generating a new impurity removal process ( Geopolymers are X-ray amorphous alumino-silicates akin to organic polymers but with alumino-silico bridging. Like organic polymers, solidification occurs with growth of chain length and with chain to chain bridging. Geopolymers have been proposed as an alternative construction concrete binder to Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) ( The benefits of geopolymers include high compressive and tensile strength, high fire resistance and resistance to acids, which have been described elsewhere ( Geopolymers are usually made by activation of an alumino-silicate material (e.g. fly ash or metakaolin) with a high caustic silicate solution. This caustic solution has been identified as a significant contributing factor to the embodied energy of geopolymers ( The addition of bauxite residue (red mud) to geopolymers has been proposed for some time ( Since the development of Bayer derived geopolymer technology, product development has continued to progress ( With these factors in mind, it is noted that there is a shortage of quality aggregate in the South Western corridor of Western Australia from Perth to Albany ( The advantage of using Bayer derived geopolymer as aggregate rather than the binder for concrete is that potential amounts used would be much higher. This increase in liquor utilisation as aggregate would be less threatening to the conventional cement and concrete industries while providing an effective use of the Bayer liquor. Bayer liquor was processed to produce a suitable geopolymer feedstock from Alcoa's Wagerup refinery. A summary of the composition for each batch is provided in Flyash (Class F) was supplied from Collie power station in Western Australia (Batch July 2009). An XRF is provided in The amorphous content (reactive components) of fly ash and silica fume were determined by subtracting the crystalline components (measured by quantitative XRD), from the bulk chemical composition (determined by XRF) in a method outlined by Lime was supplied in the form of Hylime (Cockburn Cement) and was 93 Silica fume – A. Supplied by Doral Fused Minerals, had an amorphous SiO Silica fume – B. Supplied by BASF as Rheomac SF 100, had an amorphous SiO Sand – Red. This coarse bauxite residue was supplied as Red Sand™ from Alcoa's Wagerup Refinery pilot plant ( Sand – Yellow. This yellow sand is typically called “Brickies sand” and is required to meet Australian standard AS 2758.1. Formulations were made targeting a molar Si/Al ratio of between 2 and 3, a molar OH/Al ratio of 0.5 to 1.2 and a water composition (of paste) of between 9 and 15 XRD was conducted on the “Scan” setting of a PANalytical (Philips) X'Pert Pro MPD X-Ray Diffractometer and mineralogical analysis was determined using “Traces” software. XRF samples were prepared on a Scientific VFD 6000 automatic fluxer. Samples were analysed on a Philips model PW2400 XRF using a method optimised for bauxite particle size and mineralogy. Dry reagents (excluding sand) were added and mixed prior to addition of Bayer liquor and any additional water. The paste was mixed for 3 SEM images of samples were collected using a Zeiss Neon 40 EsB scanning electron microscope. Samples were mounted on an aluminium stub and coated with carbon or platinum prior to viewing. Compressive strength was assessed according to ASTM C39 using a Lloyds EZ50 instrument with a 50 Workability was initially measured subjectively using a four tiered scale; nil, low, medium and high. This approach was later abandoned in favour of a modified Vicat Needle procedure described in Australian standard C191. In order to utilise standard concrete industry machinery, various characteristics of the Bayer derived geopolymer require modification. These modifications do not change the chemistry of the product but do impact the physical and tactile nature prior to curing. A series of experiments were conducted utilising different lime contents to determine the optimum level for ambient curing. Samples were also oven cured at 70 The compressive strength of cured samples appears to increase with lime content with a level of 4 Lime addition was also shown to impact upon first or initial set. This is an indication of the length of time you have to manipulate the product. The impact of lime content upon first set is shown in It is apparent that the penetrometer methodology is superior to the subjective evaluations of workability. These qualities will determine the ability of the mixture to be utilised in machinery. It appears that 2–3 To reduce the cost of the aggregate and to modify the workability of the paste mixture, sand was added to make mortar aggregate. Initial experiments were conducted utilising yellow sand (commercially available) and 5  While compressive strength was not impacted between the different levels of sand, the workability of the mortar was. Red Sand™ is another by-product of the Bayer process and could possibly be sourced from the same location as the Bayer liquor. A direct comparison of Red Sand™ and yellow sand has been conducted by While A series of five standard super-plasticisers and water reducing agents commonly used in the Ordinary Portland Cement concrete industry were investigated at a rate of 13 Unfortunately none of the agents were able to produce a formulation that could naturally slump and no improvement was seen in the Vicat results (not reported). Samples were tested for compressive strength after 7 and 28 As mentioned previously silica fume was included to achieve targeted Si/Al ratios. The two types of silica fume utilised, Rheomac SF100 from Boral and AFM 98 from Australian Fused Materials (Doral), were very different. The Rheomac product had a loss on ignition of 2.6 The West Australian consumption of aggregates and rock products has been estimated to be up to seven million tonnes annually (derived from In Australia, aggregates, ballast and engineering products are graded for use depending on application. These applications are covered by Australian performance standards AS 1141 and AS 2758. Being a high volume, low value commodity, it is very important to minimise handling, keep power consumption low and utilise standard equipment to deliver a suitably priced product. Bench scale production has produced mechanically extruded products as well as blocks of material that have been crushed in a jaw crusher and screened ( The following observations were made during the laboratory-based processing. Dry reagents can be gravity fed utilising hoppers. Vibration is recommended due to a tendency for the powders to arch and bridge over a feed well. Mechanical components should be made of materials suitable for highly caustic solutions and abrasive sand. Standard pug mixing equipment should suffice for appropriate shear to mix the reagents, though a planetary mixer may be required for stiff formulations. Extrusion of the mixture was demonstrated by hand and by mechanical screw feed machinery. A screw fed extruder is believed to be a viable option. Mechanical extruders should have vacuum applied to prevent air entrapment. Using these observations and the mix design, potential process diagrams were developed. The availability of low-grade steam for elevated temperature curing is a preferred option but the addition of lime will enable ambient setting. Formation of the aggregate can be applied immediately post extrusion, or by standard jaw crushers post set. The process flow diagram shown in The embodied energy is calculated as per the methodology utilised by the processing costs of Bayer liquor, which is unlikely to substantially change; the embodied energy of sand which could be significantly lower if Bayer residue sand is utilised; the embodied energy of aggregate processing which could change depending upon formulation. It has been demonstrated that use of Bayer liquor based geopolymer is potentially suitable as aggregate. The geopolymer aggregate can be either cured at elevated temperature or ambient temperature with the addition of Ca(OH) A laboratory based screw fed system has been shown to be satisfactory for extruding the mortar prior to cutting. A flow diagram has been presented to show that the technology is readily available and suitable for geopolymer aggregate manufacture. The embodied energy of the Bayer liquor geopolymer aggregate has been calculated to be similar to recycled aggregate and mined gravel. Thus a genuinely sustainable aggregate manufacturing industry is possible by using industry by-products as precursors with, low CO Finally, it is recommended that once product aggregate is available, quality standards for aggregates be assessed such as leaching (laboratory samples assessed by