Particle motion in a screw conveyor was simulated with the discrete element method. The particle flow behavior and transport processes at different screw rotating speeds and filling levels were investigated in this study. The spatial distributions of particle velocity were predicted. The predicted mass flow rate increased with increasing screw rotating speed and filling level. The contact forces and granular temperatures of particles were also calculated. The simulation results showed that the translational granular particle temperatures were higher than the rotational granular particle temperatures. In addition, the configurational temperatures of particles were calculated from simulated instantaneous particle overlaps, and results indicated that deformation of elastic particles contributed to the rate of energy dissipation. Good agreement between the numerical simulation and experimental results was achieved in this study.Many industrial processes need to control the transportation of solids. Screw conveyors are one of the most useful conveyor devices, and they are widely used in feeding devices and lifting apparatuses, such as those used in pharmacies, mineral processing, and grain processing. Screw conveyors have good metering characteristics, use relatively simple components, are easy to control, and transport material at a steady rate. This conveyor device consists of an outer cylinder and an inner screw ( Studies on solid flow behavior have been conducted using experimental, analytical, and numerical techniques. Material flow properties affect the overall transportation process stability; therefore, the best feeding performance is heavily dependent on these properties ( Analytical and numerical models are vital in cases where measurements are either difficult or impossible to obtain. Such models can be used to understand the motion of particles in screw conveyors. Mathematical modeling and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations of the particle flow in a screw conveyor can yield detailed information regarding local particle velocity, spatial distributions, and particle motion traces. The discrete element method (DEM) within CFD can trace individual particles described by Newton’s laws of motion. The particle–particle collision mechanism is described by the soft-sphere model ( In this study, a DEM model was used to study the flow behavior of particles in a screw conveyor. A periodic boundary condition was applied to explore the performance of a long screw conveyor. The configurational and granular temperatures in the screw conveyor were used to measure the particle energy dissipation. The hydrodynamic characteristics were investigated as functions of the screw’s rotating speed and the conveyor’s particle filling level. Both the translational and rotational granular particle temperatures were computed from the simulated instantaneous velocity. The distributions of mass flow rate, particle velocity, and contact forces between particles were analyzed. A better understanding of these processes may help us to optimize the screw’s rotating speed and the conveyor’s particle filling level, which are essential for improving the transportation efficiency. The screw conveyor consists of a hopper, a stationary screw casing, and a rotating screw. Spherical particles of uniform size were investigated in this study. The translational and rotational motions of the individual particles were tracked using Newton’s second law of motion. The motion is governed by the laws of conservation of linear and angular momentum, expressed for particle In a collision between two particles, the contact force The displacement-related elastic contact stiffness, Particle–wall interactions were treated in the same way as particle–particle interactions except that the walls were assumed to be massive. Because of the computational expense, it is impossible to simulate a complete screw conveyor within a reasonable amount of time. Hence, simulations were performed with five screw sections, as shown in For each simulation, the particles were initially generated randomly at the inlet of the hopper, and allowed to settle down and pack within the hopper. The screw was then rotated at a given rotational speed. The particles were continuously discharged at the exit and then returned to the hopper inlet to keep the particle number constant during the simulation. The particle trajectories were solved at each time step using the DEM technique. The time step was based on the Rayleigh wave speed of force transmission on the surface of elastic bodies ( The new velocity and position were calculated by numerical integration of the particle acceleration. The force increment at each contact was calculated at the new position. The new particle–particle contact force was equal to the resultant vector of all contact forces acting on each particle, which was used in the next time step. Particle–wall interactions were obtained in the same way. A boxing and linked-list scheme in which the computational domain is divided into a number of boxes and each particle is mapped into a box was applied to lower the computational burden. The addresses of particles were recoded based on a link list for the mapping ( The transportation capacity in a screw conveyor is proportional to the screw rotating speed ( We first focused on the particle flow pattern in the screw conveyor. The motion of the particles was fully controlled by the various forces acting on them, including the centrifugal force, gravity, and particle–particle and particle–wall interactions. Several snapshots at the location of the third screw pitch at different screw rotating speeds are shown in The particle mass flow rate is another important operating parameter for ensuring overall transportation stability in a screw conveyor. To study the effect of grid resolution, three different grids were applied. The predicted mass flow rate as a function of screw rotating speed using three different grid sizes is shown in  To better understand the flow pattern, The granular temperature, analogous to temperature in the kinetic theory of gases, is a measure of the intensity of particle collisions and depends on the fluctuating velocity of the particles. The granular temperature in the screw conveyor was calculated from the simulated instantaneous particle velocities. In a three-dimensional system, the translational granular temperature is calculated as ( The mean angular velocity was calculated from the instantaneous angular velocity of the particles. The rotational granular temperature is defined as follows ( The distribution of computed granular temperatures as a function of the solid volume fraction at screw rotating speeds of 300, 600, and 900 In general, particle contact in an inelastic granular system leads to particle deformation. The instantaneous overlap for a given collision pair, The configurational temperature can be obtained based on the overlap as follows: The configurational temperature is used to describe the energy dissipation caused by particle collisions in a screw conveyor. The distributions of configurational temperatures of particles at screw rotating speeds of 300, 600, and 900 For the contact between two particles, the strain changes simultaneously with the deformation, which generates contact forces. Simulations showed that the contact forces varied with changes in the screw rotating speeds. Filling levels of 20%, 25%, and 30% were simulated at a screw rotating speed of 600 The particle mass flow rate is sensitive to the initial mass in the screw conveyor ( Comparing the two operating conditions, the screw rotating speed had a greater impact on the mass flow rate. When the screw rotating speed was doubled from 300 to 600 The distributions of granular temperature as a function of the solid volume fraction at filling levels of 20%, 25%, and 30% are presented in   Particle flow behavior in a pilot-scale screw conveyor was simulated using DEM, and detailed particle motion within the screw conveyor was obtained. The particle velocity and mass flow rate distributions were calculated as functions of screw rotating speed and filling level. The translational and rotational granular temperatures were calculated from the instantaneous velocity of particles. The configurational temperature was calculated from the instantaneous overlap of particles in the screw conveyor. Simulations showed both translational and rotational granular temperatures increased, reaching a maximal value, and then decreased with increasing solid volume fraction, and that they were high near the entrance from the hopper to the cylinder tube. Comparison of the mean values of the granular temperature and rotational granular temperature indicated that particle translation was the main motion mode. The axial particle velocity, mass flow rate, configurational temperature, and contact forces between particles increased with increasing screw rotating speed. However, increasing the filling level enhanced the mass flow rate and reduced the axial particle velocity, while the high and low filling levels produced lower configurational temperatures and contact forces between particles. By comparing the effects of the screw rotating speed and filling level on the mass flow rate, it was found that increasing screw rotating speed was an effective method to enhance the transportation capacity of a screw conveyor. Furthermore, an agreement between the numerical simulation and experimental results are achieved in a screw conveyor. This work was supported by the