The interfacial heat and mass transfer at nano-scale are the key procedure of various phase changes phenomena, and are of significant importance for both science and engineering applications. In the present work, molecular dynamics simulations were applied to investigate the influence of external electric field on the rupture and evaporation of aqueous thin films, which is crucial for bubble coalescence within the context of flotation. The properties of pure water and saline liquid thin films at the absence and presence of parallel electric fields were examined with field intensity ranging from 0.1 to 10V/nm. It was observed that for relatively thick film, which is very stable (4×4×1.45nm) with infinite life time under the electric-field free condition, by incorporating an electric field, the rupture process was significantly accelerated with increases in the field strength. With the field strength reaches up to a threshold at 2–2.5V/nm, the rupture occurred nearly instantly and temperature increased due to molecular friction, a further increase of strength resulted in thermostat’s improper working and the evaporation of molecules. The surface tension exhibits a decreasing trend when the field strength is below 1V/nm, surface tension cannot be correctly measured when the field intensity is above 2V/nm due to the influence of rupture and evaporation. This result provides a theoretical guidance with external electric field for nano-electric transfer, regarding the potential of electro-coalescence between bubbles during flotation process.Hamaker constant, J electrolyte concentration, mol/L electronic charge, C energy, J Planck’s constant, J·s Boltzmann’s constant, J/K mass, kg number of degree of freedom normal and tangential pressure tensors, Pa charge distance, m temperature, K characteristic energy of Lennard–Jones parameters, J Lennard–Jones characteristic distance, nm surface tension of the film, mN/m bond angle disjoining pressure, Pa main electronic adsorption frequency, Hz surface potential, V The application of external electric field has been a driving procedure for various microelectronic and nano-optoelectronic technologies, such as inkjet printing In the field of flotation By applying external electric fields to tailor the bubble distribution, then to optimize the flotation parameters, has great potential. However, its detailed description at a microscopic level is hard to experimentally achieve. Due to the small scale, there lie several difficulties in accurate experimentation of thin films. Modeling is an effective method to understand the microscopic mechanism of the aqueous interaction, and a large number of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations To control and tailor the rupture process of bubbles, the microscopic mechanism of the aqueous interaction needs to be understood. Hereby, the molecular mechanism of the effect of a parallel electric field on the deformation of an aqueous nano-film is interpreted by MD simulations. Information presented below on the molecular details of film spreading, rupture and evaporation with or without an electric field should be of value to enhance our fundamental understanding of the microscopic mechanisms governing the electric field interaction with an aqueous free film. The possibility of eliminating redundant bubble through external electric field was discussed. In MD a conservative force field was used, which is a function of the positions of atoms only. This means that the electronic motions are not considered. Electrons are in the ground state. The force field here is pair-additive. Some processes could not be properly treated by classical dynamics, e.g. motion of protons which had essential quantum mechanical characters. Using Newton’s equation implies using classical mechanics to describe the motion of atoms. The key point is computing forces. The force on any atom In The temperature is given by the total kinetic energy of the Molecular dynamics method is based on the classical Newton’s second law of motion, a leap-frog algorithm was applied for integrating Newton’s equations of motion, with proper potential parameters to represent molecular model. The simulation system for the rupture process and evaporation of an aqueous film was in the middle of the A slab geometry was employed for thin films. The thin films were constructed as the size of the box was set to After the thin film was at equilibration within NVT ensemble, a homogeneous electric field MD simulations were performed with TIP4P/2005 Total energy is the sum of potential energy and kinetic energy. Total potential energy contains the following aspects. The TIP4P/2005 water model consists of a LJ site for the oxygen atom, and three charge sites. The LJ parameters are assigned for each ion with atomic charge of “+1” for cations and “−1” for anions. The parameters, e.g. charge and mass of the atom, and LJ parameters, are assigned within the force field. The geometric combining rules for the Lennard–Jones coefficients were employed as, The interactions between water and ion belong to non-bonded interactions using Eq. Recently, Vega For the bulk system, the density of TIP4P/2005 water at 300 The first 2 To certify the model and the configuration, the dipole moment for TIP4P/2005 water was obtained as 2.306 Debye with dipole moment distribution in The correlation function for a property At the absence of electric field, the molecular motions are random but statistically symmetric. The ion concentration at 0.9 For the thin films, the lateral size was kept The lateral size was kept constant and the thickness of the film was gradually decreased, it was expected that the thin films would not rupture at relatively thick thickness, e.g. water film and NaCl film with thickness 1.23 In order to rationalize the behavior of rupture process, the potential energy of the system was analyzed as a function of the course of evolution, which are shown in The rupture occurred in this study (e.g. by electric field) is strong and clear to confirm, thus, parameter (e.g. the density) for detailed quantifying the rupture After the preparation of the equilibrium system, the value of the homogeneous electric field is set to 0.1, 1, 2, 2.5, 5 or 10 At  The first The potential energy, surface tension and temperature of aqueous NaCl nano-film are shown in In simulations for diffusion constant, two methods can be applied, the mean square displacement (MSD) of atoms as a function of time from a set of initial positions provides an easy way to compute the diffusion constant. Calculation of the velocity autocorrelation function also provides a link to the diffusion coefficient. Given long enough simulations, both methods should give equivalent results. In this work, the former method was used. In a MD calculation, the diffusion coefficient can be calculated by monitoring the mean square displacement and exploiting the well-known Einstein relation to calculate the diffusion constants, Under the electric field, the plot of MSD vs. time is not linear, because the molecule does not move randomly as that of free of electric field. The smaller slope in the MSD vs. time at longer times (after 500 The rotational correlation function of water in aqueous NaCl film is shown in The average potential energy under various external electric fields is shown in Please note that, 4 The detailed parameters and values are listed as follows for Eq. The repulsive component EDL can be expressed as The aqueous NaCl film within 1–2 The physical foundations about the rupture behaviors for ion-induced can be inferred from ion-water binding energy and DAF. The DAFs of water within the film were observed to be stronger in salt films than in a pure water film. For electric field-induced case, using additional force (from electric field) would result in much stronger force to drag water molecules than the water–water interaction at the absence of electric field. It was suggested Connection of the results obtained with liquid film during the bubbles approaching, in presence of electric field, is going, although far from real industrial applicability. As can be concluded from the previous section, that the external electric field can significantly accelerate the rupture process of the thin films. The possibility of applying this potential methodology to experimental flotation for the elimination of redundant bubbles is shown in Understanding of heat and dynamic mass transfer process of thin liquid film is important, with which the same forces govern the phys-chemical properties and stability of various systems. Electric field offers potential approach to control and manipulate the properties of bubble from the macro to nano-scale, and the molecular details of deformation subjected in an electric field should be of value. In this work, the dynamics of rupture process of free aqueous nano-films with dissolved NaCl salt in the absence and presence of a homogenous electric field are comparatively studied by MD simulations at the molecular level, considering the induced evaporation and the interplay with surface forces. At the absence of electric field, as expected, the rupture process is enhanced by NaCl compared with pure water film, and temperature unchanged. By the non-equilibrium MD simulation under external electric field, rupture and evaporation of free aqueous films are accelerated, with surface tension decrease with the increase of field strength at weak field range. A threshold field of 2–2.5 National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51506013), Scientific Research Foundation of State Key Lab of Coal Mine Disaster Dynamics and Control (2011DA105287-KF201309), and Fundamental Research Fund of the Central Universities of China (No. CDJZR13240022 and 0903005203237) are acknowledged.