Inverse gas chromatography (IGC) is a versatile and powerful technique for characterizing physicochemical properties of materials. One such property, the surface energy, plays an important role in the adhesiveness, wettability, and consequently flotation of minerals. In this work, quartz was chosen as a naturally hydrophilic mineral, and dodecylamine was used to hydrophobise the surface. To study the correlation between the surface properties as measured from IGC experiments and flotation, microflotation experiments were also conducted. It was shown that with treatment by dodecylamine, the surface energy decreased, as did the work of adhesion to water. The recovery of quartz increased after the treatment, indicating a correlation between surface energy and flotation response.
                  The results indicate that IGC has the capability to determine the thermodynamic properties of quartz, pre- and post-conditioning. Relating the hydrophobicity and flotation of minerals to the surface energy can be observed from combining the results of IGC and microflotation experiments.Surface energy measurements have attracted the attention of researchers in a wide variety of fields due to its importance in physical and chemical reactions. Inverse gas chromatography (IGC) has been applied to the characterization of solid surfaces for more than 40 Mineral flotation is dependent upon the hydrophilic or hydrophobic characteristic of particles. Surface energies of both valuable minerals and gangue play an important role in the separation process. In other words, the nature and quantity of the excess energies on the surface of components of ore has a decisive role in flotation process. Contact angle measurements are one of the most widely utilized methods for determining surface energy of solids. However, the results obtained for powders are difficult to obtain compared to those of smooth, flat surfaces due to surface roughness, porosity and irregular shapes. A comprehensive review by Determining the surface characteristics of minerals accurately leads to an understanding of the mechanism of interfacial behaviour. All of the above techniques have their merits and limitations in measuring the hydrophobic nature of particles. This paper discusses the applicability of IGC to investigate the flotation of particles. The interfacial behaviour of a material is an important characteristic, controlled mainly by surface properties, one of the most important of which is the surface free energy. Thermodynamically, surface free energy of a solid is the required work to reversibly create a unit area of a surface. It is, in fact, an excess energy on the material surface which arises from fewer bonds between surface molecules comparing to bulk molecules. This energy is analogous to surface tension of liquids in which the atoms are able to move from the higher-energy surface to the lower-energy bulk, resulting in changes in the surface area. However, geometry and mechanical state of solids affect the apparent values of surface energy ( The surface energy of solids is defined as the sum of dispersive and specific (acid–base) components. The dispersive component, also called non-specific interactions, is attributed to molecular interactions due to London (van der Waals) forces. The specific component (also termed acid–base interactions) results from polar interactions such as hydrogen bonding and electron donor–acceptor behaviour ( Inverse gas chromatography provides important information such as surface area, surface energetics, work of adhesion, and surface energy heterogeneity. In this method, the sample is placed in a column (most commonly a glass tube) and characterized by passing solutes (called molecular probes) through the column. Adsorption and desorption phenomena occur at the sample which result in delayed exit of the probe from the column (retention). Therefore the fundamental data obtained from IGC is a plot of the detector signals as a function of retention time ( The surface energy of a solid can be obtained from IGC by applying various relationships. The two commonly used approaches for characterizing surface energetics of materials are the Dorris–Gray and Schultz methods. In this study, the Schultz approach was applied to calculate the dispersive component of the surface energy and specific free energies of quartz with different polar probe molecules. Eq. The specific free energies of desorption (Δ Now with both The total surface energy can then be calculated by adding the specific and dispersive contributions ( Once the total surface energies are calculated, the work of adhesion can be determined by Eq. The work of adhesion ( In the present study, IGC was used to characterize the surface energy of quartz by injecting a series of probe vapours at a specific surface coverage. The surface energy heterogeneity was observed by injecting the probe vapours at different surface coverages. The surfaces were changed by treatment with dodecylamine to induce hydrophobicity. The correlation between surface energy and flotation recovery of the samples was investigated through microflotation. The mineral investigated was quartz (Ward’s Scientific, USA), as a naturally hydrophilic mineral, in three size fractions (after crushing and grinding): −75 +53 In order to change the degree of hydrophobicity, the examined minerals were conditioned by applying a solution of dodecylamine (DDA) as collector for quartz. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) solution was used as the frother in microflotation experiments. BET surface area of the samples was determined by a Surface Area and Porosity Analyzer (Micromeritics TriStar, USA). The N In order to modify the quartz surface, a 0.01 Microflotation experiments were conducted using a modified Smith–Partridge cell Surface energy measurements were carried out using the Surface Energy Analyzer, SEA (Surface Measurements System Ltd., UK). The inert carrier gas used was helium and the measurements were carried out at 20 The mean particle size and BET surface area of the samples are given in The recovery of the three quartz samples as a function of dispersive surface energy measured at 5% surface coverage is shown in From the flotation behaviour, it was expected that the surface energy would decrease after modification with the collector, which is seen in   Higher hydrophilicity and Inverse gas chromatography (IGC) has been shown to have potential for characterizing the surface energy of minerals. The dispersive and specific surface energy of the quartz samples were measured and compared. Moreover, the obtained values for surface energetics, work of adhesion, and hydrophilicity do, in general, agree with flotation recovery. Much further work is required to fully utilize the potential of inverse gas chromatography in mineral processing. The authors would like to acknowledge