Voltammetric studies, contact angle measurements, collector and collectorless microflotation tests were carried out in this study to investigate the oxidation properties and flotation characteristics of enargite as well as chalcopyrite. Selective flotation of enargite from chalcopyrite under varied pulp potentials was conducted to investigate the feasibility of enargite removal from a chalcopyrite concentrate.
                  The test results indicate that chalcopyrite began to oxidize quickly at a much lower potential than enargite. Enargite could be floated well at a potential higher than +0.2V vs. SCE while chalcopyrite was completely depressed at a potential higher than +0.2V vs. SCE. Selective flotation revealed that enargite can be successfully removed from chalcopyrite through controlling the pulp potential higher than +0.2V and lower than +0.55V vs. SCE.Enargite (Cu From a large number of investigations in this field, the oxidation of both mineral and collector were found to play an important role in the collection process. The hydrophilic behavior of most sulfide minerals is attributed to the presence of an oxide or a hydroxide layer; in the presence of collectors, a coating on the surface is produced that contributes to the hydrophobicity of the mineral ( In this paper, the oxidation characteristics of enargite and chalcopyrite, their wettability and electrochemical flotation behaviors under controlled potentials are investigated. Selective flotation of enargite from chalcopyrite was conducted. The selective flotation was conducted on synthetic enargite and natural chalcopyrite due to the availability of mineral samples. Synthetic enargite (Cu The results in Synthetic chalcopyrite (CuFeS The natural chalcopyrite samples were supplied by Ward’s Natural Science Establishment, Inc. X-ray diffraction of the samples showed no impurity peaks. The chemical assay of the natural chalcopyrite sample is given in The natural chalcopyrite contained trace amount of lead, zinc and nickel. The purity of the sample was assumed over 98%. Due to availability of the mineral samples, the single mineral flotation test was conducted on synthetic enargite and natural chalcopyrite. The synthetic composite ore used in selective flotation of enargite from chalcopyrite consisted of 50% synthetic enargite and 50% natural chalcopyrite. Buffer solutions used in this investigation consist of boric acid, potassium chloride, sodium hydroxide (to give a pH 10); sodium and potassium phosphate (to give a pH 7). All the buffer solutions were supplied by Fisher Scientific. Nitrogen gas (Ultra high purity, 99.9999% N Mineral electrodes for electrochemical study were prepared according to the following procedure. Synthetic and natural mineral samples were cut and shaped into 1.4 The electrode working areas varied from 2.0 For polarization tests, the electrode was put on the shaft immediately after a fresh surface was produced and connected with the corrosion test system, then the electrode was immersed into the test solution and a potential sweep on the electrode was initiated instantly and the current vs. potential curve was recorded automatically. To obtain the contact angle of a mineral electrode under different potentials, the mineral electrode was first conditioned under a fixed potential in the PAX solution for a period of 10 The microflotation samples were prepared by dry grinding after the samples were crushed to −1 In order to wash away the oxidation products, especially the elemental sulfur on the particle surfaces of the flotation samples, the sample was washed with a 5% Na First, 10 To carry out a chemical-controlled-pulp-potential microflotation, about 40  The results in The results in The comparison of the contact angles on enargite and chalcopyrite surfaces obtained under externally applied potentials in a 7 The results in In contrast, the synthetic and natural chalcopyrites only demonstrated good hydrophobicity in a narrow potential range from −0.1  The effect of applied potential on the wettability of enargite and chalcopyrite was enhanced in a diluted PAX solution, i.e. 7 Single mineral flotation of synthetic enargite and natural chalcopyrite was conducted in the 7  The flotation results of enargite and chalcopyrite in a collectorless pH 10 solution are shown in  Both the collector and collectorless flotation results indicate that there was a potential to separate enargite from chalcopyrite by controlling the pulp potential. In order to investigate the possibility of enargite removal from a copper concentrate, selective flotation of enargite and chalcopyrite was conducted. A synthetic composite ore consisting of 50% synthetic enargite and 50% natural chalcopyrite was used in the tests. The flotation results of the synthetic composite ore in a collectorless solution at pH 10 are shown in The results in The electrochemical flotation results of the synthetic composite ore sample in a 7 The results in The reasons for the restoration of the contact angle at the chalcopyrite surface and the low flotation recovery of chalcopyrite obtained at a potential higher than +0.2 The flotation results of the synthetic composite ore sample concluded that enargite could be separated from chalcopyrite by electrochemical flotation. The results also indicate that single mineral electrochemical flotation results are useful in predicting the electrochemical flotation behaviors of the mineral in a composite mineral sample. On the other hand, mixing of enargite and chalcopyrite had a considerable effect on their floatabilities. Under all the pulp potentials tested, enargite in the synthetic composite ore was always more floatable than chalcopyrite in both collector and collectorless flotations. The single mineral flotation conducted in a collectorless solution showed that chalcopyrite floated better than enargite in the pulp potential range from −0.1 The flotation response of enargite and chalcopyrite could be explained by their oxidation properties under different potentials. The polarization studies on enargite and chalcopyrite indicate that chalcopyrite was much easier to oxidize at high potentials than enargite and this accounted for the floatability difference of enargite and chalcopyrite at high potentials. Another phenomenon observed in the single mineral flotation and selective flotation of enargite and chalcopyrite was that enargite floated much faster in the collector solution than in the collectorless solution. This phenomenon might be due to the fact that the hydrophobic entity at the enargite surface in the collectorless solution was S Both collector and collectorless selective flotations can be used to separate enargite from a chalcopyrite concentrate. The better method is the collector selective flotation since it guarantees a better selectivity and a faster flotation rate. The arsenic content in a copper concentrate has to be lower than 0.1% to avoid any penalties. Although the actual penalty could be different from one contract to another, the penalty for every 0.1% of arsenic exceeding the 0.1% limit equals to the value of 0.2–0.3% copper in the concentrate. It will be economically feasible if an enargite flotation product with an As/Cu ratio greater than one could be generated.  Chalcopyrite began to oxidize at a much lower potential than enargite. The contact angles measured on the chalcopyrite electrode decreased dramatically, especially in a solution with low PAX concentrations, when the applied potential was higher than +0.2 Single mineral electrochemical flotation results indicate that enargite showed good floatability at potentials higher than +0.2 Synthetic composite ore sample flotation results illustrate that enargite can be successfully separated by electrochemical flotation from chalcopyrite. At a pulp potential of 0.5 The authors wish to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for financial support. Mr. Mike Fulton is acknowledged for editorial advice.