An attractive class of advanced structural materials are the ordered intermetallics which usually exhibit remarkable structural stability along with excellent high temperature mechanical properties. The Ni, Ti and Fe aluminide intermetallics have received considerable attention from materials scientists and engineers for the last few years due to their perceived superiorities over conventional materials. Among these aluminides, Fe One of the major limitations of these materials, however, is lack of room temperature (RT) ductility which possibly is related to some kind of environmental embrittlement Various aspects of iron aluminide based alloys with compositions near that of Fe The material used for the present study was Fe-28 at.% Al alloy prepared by vacuum arc melting followed by extrusion at 1100° C. Hot rolling was carried out in the temperature range of 850°–650° C and these hot rolled plates were further subjected to warm rolling at 500° C upto 80% deformation. The recrystallisation study was carried out with the 80% warm rolled strips which were isothermally annealed at four different temperatures starting from 550° C to 700° C for different annealing times. Longitudinal sections of specimens were examined by optical microscopy after careful polishing and etching. The etchant used in this study was a mixture of CH The starting microstructure of the 80% warm rolled material, taken from the rolling plane, longitudinal section as well as transverse section, is shown in  The constant In order to determine the activation energy ( It has been noticed that throughout the entire recrystallisation process, the The values of the Avrami exponent ( Hutchinson et al. Ranganathan et al. Since the present investigation nucleation of recrystallised grains has beeen found to occur predominantly within the shear bands, it will not be proper to assume a standard recrystallisation model which requires random nucleation sites. The shear bands will almost certainly have a higher stored energy than the general deformed matrix, and this also goes against the requirement of a uniform stored energy to drive recrystallisation growth. Thus the value of nearly 1 for The estimated activation energy ( During recrystallisation of a binary Fe