A kinetic study of the removal of Fe3+, Cu2+, Mn2+ and Zn2+ cations from solution by natural zeolite (clinoptilolite) was performed. The influence of agitation speed (190, 390 and 645rpm) and particle size (dp
                     <180μm, 1–3mm and 5.6–6.7mm) on the rate limiting step of the overall process was investigated. The data obtained was fitted to kinetic models with the Nernst Planck model giving the best fit, showing intra-particle diffusion as rate controlling. The effective diffusion coefficient for each cation was calculated. Intraparticle diffusion was shown to be rate controlling.Heavy metal ions pose a serious threat to human health, animals and ecological systems. This is because heavy metal contaminants, such as Cu The main sources of heavy metal contamination are acid mine drainage, AMD, discharges from mines, metal plating facilities and tanneries ( The use of natural zeolite as an adsorbent has gained interest among researchers; mainly because its sorption properties provide a combination of ion exchange and molecular sieve properties which can also be easily modified ( The work presented in this paper is a study of the kinetics of Fe In this study natural zeolite samples from Turkey were used, provided by IMERYS Minerals Ltd, UK. The samples were used in their natural state (“as received”) with no chemical modifications. The particle size distribution of the samples was determined using screens and a sieve shaker. The particle size range of the natural zeolite used in this study was 1 to 3 Synthetic solutions of Fe Batch sorption tests were conducted by mixing 3.7 Agitation or mixing of the solution and zeolite was done using two methods. The first method was agitation in a beaker using a mixing blade (stirred tank reactor) at different speeds (190–390–645 The effect of adsorbent particle size on the kinetics of the process was also investigated. Three different sizes were used; 20 The percentage adsorption (%) was calculated using: Kinetic modelling was carried out to investigate the rate controlling step in the removal of heavy metals from solution by natural zeolite. It is well known that the removal of cations from solution by natural zeolite is by ion exchange ( Diffusion of counter-ions in the external solution phase surrounding the particle (film diffusion control), Inter-diffusion of counter-ions within the exchanger itself (particle diffusion control), and Chemical reaction at the sites of the functional group within the exchanger (chemical reaction kinetic control). There are a number of kinetic models ( Pseudo second order kinetic models Nernst Planck model Vermeulen's approximation Furusawa and Smith's model The experimental data that fits to this model indicate that the rate limiting step for the process involves chemical reaction, that is, chemisorption ( The rate constant should be constant for all values of initial concentration of counter-ions, The rate constant should not change with adsorbent particle size, and The rate constant is If any of these conditions is not satisfied, chemical reaction kinetics is not rate controlling even if rate data is successfully fitted to the pseudo second order kinetic model. The rates of adsorption, desorption, and ion exchange in porous materials are generally thought to be controlled by mass transport within the pore network/channels, rather than the kinetics of sorption or ion exchange itself ( There are a number of simplified models for the estimation of intraparticle diffusion coefficients, in this study only the Vermeulen's and Nernst–Planck's approximations were considered. The zeolite is spherical containing counterion A The adsorption process is assumed to be isotopic exchange, that is, it is assumed that the diffusion coefficient is constant. The equation to be solved is ( The solution ( Instead of Eq. Vermeulen's approximation is widely applied in related literature ( This model incorporates the effect of the existence of an electric field generated by the motion of cations during the diffusion process, since there has to be a conservation of The pertinent equations for solid diffusion control are solved with numerical methods and the results are expressed by Nernst–Planck's approximation, for complete conversion of solid to B For univalent–bivalent exchange: If a In a well agitated reactor, the concentration C of adsorbate and concentration m When intraparticle diffusion resistance is negligible and the equilibrium isotherm is linear (q Furusawa and Smith solved Eqs. Eq. These tests are performed in order to determine experimentally the rate controlling mechanism; that is, to distinguish between film transfer control and intraparticle diffusion control ( For each experiment, fractional attainment, U was plotted against time, t. U was calculated from Eq.  The results obtained for adsorption of Fe The diffusion coefficient of the natural zeolite was calculated by rearranging Eq. The time in seconds required to attain 50% of equilibrium, t The values of the diffusion coefficients and their half times for the heavy metals under consideration in this study are summarised in The values of the diffusion coefficients obtained from the Nernst–Planck's approximation are presented in The hydration radii of the cations are: r The purpose of this calculation is to verify the assumption made at the beginning that the rate limiting step in the adsorption of the heavy metals from solution by natural zeolite is intraparticle diffusion rather than film transfer resistance ( Rearranging Eq. To determine how good the model fits the experimental data a plot of (C/C Moreover, The results for the interruption test performed indicate that intraparticle diffusion is rate controlling for the removal of heavy metals from solution by natural zeolite, After the kinetic studies and interruptions tests were conducted, it was evident that intraparticle diffusion was the main rate controlling step in the removal of heavy metals from solution by natural zeolite. The diffusion coefficients of the different heavy metals were calculated using the Vermeulen's approximation and Nernst Planck's model. Nernst Planck's model gave a good fit of the experimental results indicating that the effects of Future work on this project will focus on the interaction of cations in actual acid mine drainage and how it affects the removal kinetics of cations from solution using natural zeolite, with the view of designing a water treatment system. The financial support of the