The high-temperature behavior of two as-cast high-manganese steels with different levels of carbon (0.49 and 0.07wt%) has been studied by employing hot compression tests at different temperatures (900, 1000 and 1100°C) and strain rates (0.01, 0.1, 1 and 10/s). Microstructures of the deformed specimens have been examined using SEM–EBSD. The steels are compared in terms of their flow stress level, activation energy of deformation, critical stress and strain for the initiation of softening, and extent of grain refinement. The two steels behave quite differently: flow stress levels at small strains are higher for the high-carbon steel than for the low-carbon one but softening, starting at very small strains, is very pronounced in the former, whereas only slight softening is observed for the low-carbon steel. This peculiar behavior of the high-carbon steel is due to the localization of strain along segregation bands and possibly the presence of ferrite at high temperatures in the highly segregated regions of the cast structure. Effective grain refinement occurs by dynamic recrystallization in both the steels.Among the various austenitic steels, those showing twinning induced plasticity (TWIP) are well known for their excellent ductility at room temperature due to intense strain hardening up to large values of strain As with other metals and alloys, hot working is an integral part of the production of TWIP steels and the investigation of its hot deformation behavior is of industrial importance. Li et al. All the above-mentioned studies concerned wrought high-manganese steels with low carbon contents (less than 0.15%). Hamada et al. Even though industrial hot rolling starts from a cast structure, there are few studies on the hot deformation behavior of as-cast austenitic steels. Ryan and McQueen However, to the best of authors' knowledge, hot deformation of as-cast TWIP steels has not yet been reported in the literature. In the present work, the hot deformation behavior of two as-cast high-manganese TWIP steels with different carbon concentrations (0.49 and 0.07 The chemical compositions of the steels used in this study are given in Hot compression tests were conducted using a Gleeble 3800 thermo-mechanical simulator. The specimens were heated at the rate of 10 The deformed specimens were then cut along the axis of compression and studied using a scanning electron microscope with an electron backscatter diffraction detector (SEM–EBSD). For EBSD examinations, the specimens were polished using a 0.05 The compressive flow curves at two strain rates of 0.1 and 1/s are shown in Before testing, the room temperature microstructure of HC steel was fully austenitic with the grain size of approximately 700 Obviously, there exists a higher level of micro-segregation of Mn and Al in the HC steel. Critical stresses correspond to the initiation of microstructural changes in the tested material It is interesting to compare the above behavior in terms of the Zener-Hollomon parameter ( Using the flow stress curves at different temperatures and strain rates, the activation energy of deformation for both steels was calculated based on the well-known Arrhenius-type hyperbolic sine equation according to the method described in Critical strains for the onset of microstructural evolution can be obtained from the critical stresses determined in the way described above. Based on the calculated activation energy values, critical strains for the HC and LC steels have been calculated and are plotted as a function of ln ( Examples of EBSD maps corresponding to specimens of the HC steel deformed at different strain rates and temperatures are shown in At the same low strain rate of 0.01/s, the higher temperature of 1100 The high temperature flow curves in Regarding the high-temperature deformation behavior of the studied TWIP steels, it is seen that the flow stress level at small strains (before the initiation of softening) was markedly higher for the HC steel than for the LC steel ( However, another mechanism to explain the high flow stress level might be connected with the higher carbon content of the HC steel and thereby a higher number of Mn–C dipoles available for short range ordering, as observed and discussed by Saeed-Akbari et al. The flow curves of the HC steel showed distinct peak stress at very small strains after which pronounced softening was observed ( The flow curves reported by Reyes-Calderon et al. According to the EDS data represented in Unlike for the HC steel, the flow stress curves of the LC steel do not exhibit pronounced softening and a distinct peak is rarely observed. However, it should be noted that non-existence of a peak stress does not necessarily imply the absence of DRX. There are many studies reporting partial or even complete DRX in low-carbon austenitic steels without a distinct peak stress and steady state, e.g. As seen in In addition to the localization of strain and the possible presence of ferrite, another reason for the difference in the critical strains of these HC and LC steels might be connected to the higher density of carbon-manganese dipoles in the steels with higher carbon contents. It is well known that these dipoles effectively increase the work hardening rate of a high-manganese steel by pinning its dislocations From The dynamically recrystallized average grain size is not dependent on the initial grain size if the imposed strain is sufficient The hot deformed microstructure of the LC steel was different from that of the HC steel. High-temperature flow curves ( Due to the lower carbon content in the LC steel, the room-temperature stacking fault energy (SFE) for this steel is lower than that of the HC steel The hot deformation behavior of two as-cast coarse-grained TWIP steels with different levels of carbon (0.49% and 0.07%) has been studied by conducting hot compression tests at different temperatures and strain rates. The following conclusions can be drawn from the work: At lower strains, flow stress levels for the 0.49% C steel were higher than those of the 0.07% C steel. The reason is still unclear, but might be connected with higher carbon content in the former providing a larger number of Mn–C dipoles resulting in short range ordering. In the cast steel with 0.49% C, softening was very pronounced starting at very small strains and not reaching a steady state up to the maximum applied strain of ~0.8, whereas in the cast steel with 0.07% C, the flow stress curves showed no clear peaks. The level of interdendritic micro-segregation was higher for the high-carbon steel and led to the formation of strain localization bands. Formation of ferrite at high temperatures in the segregation bands with lower Mn and higher Al and Si might also be possible, though not predicted by Thermocalc software. The localization of strain and the possible presence of ferrite are suggested as the reasons for the early and pronounced softening of this steel. The activation energy of deformation of the high-carbon steel is only slightly higher than that of the low-carbon steel. However, both values are comparable to those reported for wrought TWIP steels. In the high-carbon steel deformed at various strain rates and temperatures, the occurrence of dynamic recrystallization (DRX) was proven by microstructural studies. However, only partial DRX could be observed in some of the low-carbon steel specimens. The large grain size of the as-cast structures was effectively refined by DRX in both steels. With increasing strain rate, the DRX grain size became smaller. In the low-carbon steel, the formation of epsilon-martensite during cooling was suppressed after the attainment of a sufficiently fine austenite grain size.