The froth flotation method, which is used for the processing of most non-ferrous ores, involves the adsorption of both organic and inorganic reagents at the mineral/water interface. Understanding the adsorption mechanisms of flotation reagents is a key step to enhance the flotation. New depressants and collectors formulations, more efficient, selective, and environmental friendly can be suggested. At the moment, few experimental methods can show surface molecular mechanisms with accuracy and confidence. Therefore, atomistic simulations allow to gain understanding in the mechanisms involved in the reagents adsorption. Nowadays, atomistic simulations can be applied to describe the solid/liquid interface and the adsorption mechanisms. Depending on the method, the interactions between atoms are described on the basis of density functional theory (DFT) or force-fields. They give access to various levels of accuracy, parameters consideration, sampling times, system sizes, and reactivity description, depending on the method used. In particular, ab initio molecular dynamics allows to investigate adsorption processes at liquid-solid interfaces at finite temperature with accuracy.The world demand in mineral commodities, including metals and industrial minerals, has been exponentially increasing over the past decades. Although physical separations are widely used to concentrate the target metal-bearing mineral(s), most of non-ferrous ores are, today, processed by the froth flotation method ( Liberations sizes in most ores are nowadays low enough to make unable the use of classical physical separation methods, making the froth flotation mandatory to concentrate the target mineral(s). Also, the average ore grades are decreasing over time ( Over the past few years, molecular modelling has gathered interest to understand the key mechanisms that are the basis of the froth flotation process. This increase can be assessed by expressing the number of original research articles that have included the words “flotation” and “molecular simulations” over the fifteen last years ( The energy of systems describing the adsorption processes can be calculated using highly accurate methods based on quantum mechanical descriptions such as Hartree-Fock, post-Hartree-Fock, and density functional theory (DFT) ( In quantum simulations, it is assumed that all the bonds and interactions between atoms are related to the electrons, which can be described using the Schrödinger equation, considered as time–independent to simplify the problem: Hence, the time-independent Schrödinger equation depends on 4N + 3M variables, where N is the number of electrons and M the number of nuclei, which makes nearly impossible a numerical resolution. To reduce the number of variables involved in the Schrödinger equation, the Born-Oppenheimer approximation is commonly used, in which the nuclei are considered immobile since their mass is significantly higher than the electrons (around 1800 times). Therefore, the nuclear kinetic energy operator can be neglected while the nucleus-nucleus Colombian interaction is constant. It induces that the total energy of the system corresponds to the sum of the total electronic energy of the system and a constant term representing the nucleus-nucleus interaction term. In the Born-Oppenheimer approximation, the electron-electron repulsion term, Besides, Hohenberg and Kohn demonstrated that the total energy E To propose a practical mean to solve this equation, Kohn and Sham suggested a method ( The unknown terms are gathered in a quantity called the exchange-correlation energy, E Overall, DFT simplifies a 3N–dimensional problem (where N is the number of electrons) to a 3–dimensional problem with a high accuracy and a relatively low computational cost. Hence, it enables the electronic structure calculations of crystals and molecules in liquid or gas phases for relatively large systems. More than 15 DFT calculations are used to determine the structure and energy of a system in its ground-state and, hence, do not describe atoms movements and the thermal motion. For that, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations can be used: they produce dynamical trajectories for a system composed of N particles by integrating Newton’s equations of motion: CMD are based on force fields, which enable the calculation of the external forces acting on each particle for the integration of Newton’s equations of motion. Force fields represent an expression of the energy of a system as a function of the coordinates of its particles ( In Eq. Prior to the froth flotation process, a size reduction stage is performed to enable the transport of mineral particles by air bubbles. This crushing and milling stages cleave bonds existing between cations and anions in the mineral and generate new mineral surfaces. Minerals are cleaved following their usual cleavage planes, well described in the literature, which correspond to the surfaces with the lowest surface energy, In practice, different surfaces have to be generated from a bulk previously relaxed by first principles methods (DFT or HF), including the common cleavage planes that are usually well described in the crystallography area. Then, the different generated surfaces should be relaxed and the surface energy (in J·m After the milling/crushing stages, the surface exposure follows a probability law that can be related to the surface energy differences between all the surfaces. However, at the moment, molecular modelling of the adsorption of flotation reagents cannot be performed on too many different surfaces since it would represent high computational costs. Hence, an assessment has to be done on the main exposed surface(s), which is/are selected for the following adsorption studies. The surface behaviour determination should constitute the first work to perform: for example, The froth flotation process and, most of the time, the prior milling stage are performed in aqueous conditions. It induces that the surfaces generated during the milling stage are exposed to water molecules before being in contact with flotation reagents. Hence, these later, when added to the pulp, interact with hydrated surfaces, Adsorption of molecular water Adsorption of dissociated water, leading to a hydroxylation of surface cations Substitution of a surface anion by a hydroxyl group (HO Influence of the surface on several water layers at the interface To consider mechanisms 1 and 2, the adsorption energy of a lone water molecule should be calculated and compared with the adsorption energy of a dissociated water molecule, where the H atom is set on a surface anion while the HO group is placed on a surface cation. The point 3 should be investigated by considering the following reaction, with A being the surface anion: The 4 systems should be relaxed with their energy calculated, summed for each member of the equation (left and right), and compared with each other to assess the preference of the anion substitution. Finally, the point 4 should be investigated by increasing the surface coverage: from a lone water molecule, one should add sequentially water molecules to reach a 100% coverage prior to add a second and a third water molecules layer. The final step is to conduct a simulation with the cell full of water molecules with a calculated density of 1 kg·dm The hydration mechanisms of widely known mineral surfaces have been intensively investigated over the past fifteen years by atomistic simulations. Various sulphides were studied by DFT simulations ( Considering their high importance for base metals (copper, zinc, lead…), sulphide minerals [pyrite (FeS Few studies exist which focus on the adsorption of flotation reagents onto silicates since these latter are usually gangue minerals that have to be rejected and, thus, not collected in flotation. However, reverse flotation processes, in which silicates are collected, have been increasingly used over the past decades to purify the final metallic concentrate after the main separation, Oxide minerals were also strongly investigated by atomistic simulations to gain understanding in the flotation reagents adsorption mechanisms. As for sulphides, anionic collectors are widely used for oxides and require the use of DFT to describe correctly chemisorption ( The adsorption of anionic collectors has been mainly investigated on semi-soluble salt minerals since they constitute sources for some critical raw materials. For instance, researchers have studied the adsorption mechanisms of anionic collectors, mostly carboxylate and hydroxamate, by DFT onto rare-earth minerals ( The froth flotation process is led by the adsorption of various reagents, organic or mineral, at the liquid/solid interface, with the objective of selectively rendering the target mineral(s) hydrophobic to recover it in the froth phase. Collectors, which contain a polar group and a non-polar aliphatic chain, can be adapted in terms of chain length, unsaturation, and ramification, as well as functionalized polar group. Moreover, all reagents can be combined to improve the flotation performances (selectivity or target mineral(s) recovery). All these optimisations are difficult to investigate by experimental methods and molecular modelling is a powerful tool to gain understanding in the adsorption mechanisms of flotation reagents at the mineral surfaces. Two main methods are widely used, force-fields-based (CMD) and The research leading to these results has received funding from the