Present paper reports the systematic scientific studies for extraction of lanthanum (La) and neodymium (Nd) from chloride solution containing rare earth metals (REMs). The chloride leach liquor was generated by dissolving rare earth mineral and found to contain 0.53g/L La and 1.01g/L Nd along with other REMs. Initial extraction studies were carried out from a model solution containing La and Nd using 10% Cyanex 272 diluted in kerosene along with 2% isodecanol (ID) as phase modifier. Various process parameters viz. effect of pH, time, O/A ratio, loading capacity, etc. were optimized for maximum extraction. More than 97% La and Nd were extracted at an equilibrium pH of 3.3 and 2.7, respectively at phase ratio (O/A) 1:1 and mixing time of 5min in two stages. 10% HCl was used to strip La as well as Nd from the loaded extractant. Moreover, 99.99% separation of La and Nd could also be achieved by stripping the loaded organic phase with pure Nd scrub solution. The optimum condition for extraction was validated with the actual solution. The result revealed that 99.49% La and 95.04% Nd can be extracted in 5min at an equilibrium pH of 3.3 and 2.7, respectively at phase ratio 1:1.Rare earth elements have become an important part of modern life and their extraction from primary and secondary sources is becoming important from industrial as well as resource conservation point of view. The major reasons behind this are their extensive use in the field of chemical engineering, metallurgy, nuclear energy, optical, magnetic, luminescence, laser materials, high-temperature superconductors and secondary batteries, catalysis, red phosphors, etc. ( La and its compounds are widely used as catalysts, additives in glass, carbon lighting in studio and projection, ignition elements in lighters and torches, electron cathodes, scintillators, welding electrodes, etc. Similarly, Nd is most commonly used as solid-state laser material processing such as in medicine ( The commercial value of REMs depends upon the purity and quality of the compound which is based on effective separation of the individual metals. Thus, different methods, including chemical precipitation, adsorption solvent extraction and ion exchange can be used to recover La (III) and Nd (III) from aqueous solutions. However, their selective separation in a simple and economical way is difficult due to their similar physicochemical properties ( Present paper reports the systematic scientific studies for extraction and separation of La and Nd from chloride medium containing other REMs. Various process parameters viz. effect of pH, time, O/A ratio, loading capacity, etc. were studied to optimize the experimental parameters for maximum metal extraction. The obtained data were validated with the actual leach liquor generated by dissolving rare earth mineral ( Synthetic solution containing La and Nd (0.5 Bench scale solvent extraction studies were carried out by mixing equal volume (50 The concentration of metals in the aqueous was determined using Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP–OES) (VISTA-PMX, CCD Simultaneous; Australia). CL 46 Experiments were carried out in different conditions to optimize various process parameters viz. effect of extractant concentration, pH, time, phase ratio, etc. for selective extraction of La and Nd. The results obtained were finally validated with the original leach liquor generated under the optimized condition developed at CSIR-NML ( The effect of Cyanex 272 concentration on the extraction of La and Nd from the model leach solution was studied. Experiments were carried out at different time intervals to observe the effect of contact time on the extraction of La and Nd from chloride medium using 10% Cyanex 272 diluted with kerosene at O/A ratio 1:1. It was found that the extraction of both metals (La and Nd) increases with increase in time. Almost 31.13% of La and 63.25% of Nd were extracted in 5 During extraction of metals using acidic extractants, H In general, the extraction of REMs using cation exchange extractants like Cyanex 272 is expressed as ( Ln denotes any REMs (here La and Nd) and A is the organic anion. But the process is more complex than given in Eq. Here H Plots of Log D vs equilibrium pH are as shown in The ratio of organic to aqueous phase (O/A) in the solvent extraction process plays an important role for the extraction of metals. Therefore, studies were carried out to observe the effect of O/A ratio on the extraction La and Nd from aqueous solution containing 0.57 The loading capacity of solvent states the maximum concentration of metal ions which can be extracted from the aqueous phase into the organic phase at a constant pH and temperature. To investigate the loading capacity of 10% ( In order to determine the number of theoretical extraction stages required for complete recovery of La and Nd from aqueous solution, McCabe–Thiele plots were drawn ( In the case of La as well as Nd, stripping study was done to extract them back from the loaded organic phase using different concentrations of HCl. It was found that stripping of both the metals depends on the concentration of HCl. The stripping of La increases from 19.68% to 90.99% and for Nd it increases from 14.6% to 91.11% as the concentration of HCl increases from 0.1 to 2 Further purification and effective separation of La from Nd could also be achieved as discussed by Banda and co-workers in 2012. The loaded organic phase was scrubbed with different concentration of pure Nd solution at pH The separation factor (β) plays an important role in separation chemistry. It is the ratio between extractant co-efficient (D) of two metal ions at equilibrium ( The results obtained from the solvent extraction study of La and Nd from their model solution was validated with the actual leach liquor, generated using 6 It was observed that 99.49% La and 95.04% Nd were extracted at equilibrium pH Based on the above studies for the recovery and extraction of La and Nd from the leach liquor containing REMs, it can be concluded that: More than 97% La and Nd were extracted from the model solution containing 0.57 This paper is based on research work carried out at CSIR—National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-NML), Jamshedpur, India. Part of the work carried out under Indo-Korean Internship Program supported by