Calcium fluoride (CaF2) was widely used in magnesium production as a surfactant. In this paper, the effect of CaF2 content on the silicothermal process was investigated. Experiments were carried out on briquettes made from mixture of calcined dolomite, ferrosilicon (Fe·Si) and CaF2. Briquettes with a thickness of about 2mm were used to reduce the effect of heat transfer on the reaction. The extent of magnesium reduction with different experimental temperatures, CaF2 content and reaction time was proposed. The experimental temperature ranged from 1323K to 1473K, and the CaF2 content was 0%–3%. The results showed that the increase of CaF2 content leads to the decrease of reaction time and the increase of reaction rate. In addition, a Box-Lucas fitting of magnesium reduction was proposed in order to describe the influence factors of reduction extent, in which the temperature, CaF2 content and reaction time were independent variables. It was indicated that the CaF2 influenced the diffusion process instead of the reduction process, which could be explained with the mathematical expression reasonably.The consumption of magnesium in automobile field was expected to increase rapidly for the next decade as automobile manufactures seek for lower vehicle weight to meet the fuel efficiency standard. The world's demand for magnesium is increasing by about 10% per year ( The Pidgeon process is a thermal reduction process that extracts magnesium from calcined dolomite (MgO·CaO). The materials of Pidgeon process include dolomite, ferrosilicon 75% (Fe·Si) and fluorite. The dolomite (MgCO It is clear that the reaction of Pidgeon process is solid-state. A unique feature of the solid-state reaction is its non-uniformity. The contact of each reactant is the vital precondition of reaction, which is mainly determined by the diffusion process. It has been confirmed that the relationship between diffusion coefficient and temperature is determined by the following equation ( The Arrhenius equation and the reaction rate of reaction The CaF The raise of temperature would increase both the diffusion coefficient It has been proved by many researches ( As clearly reported in some works ( In this paper, a new experimental method was proposed. Briquettes with a thickness of about 2 The schematic diagram of experimental apparatus was shown in The experimental temperature was above 1200 The leak test was performed using the following procedure. Open the vacuum pump with a vacuum valve (5 shown in It can be seen that the system pressure varied linearly along time, which indicated a constant leakage rate of the system as the slope of the fitting curve ( The longest experimental time in the present experiments was 60  It can be seen that the leaked air would result a weight change of about 2.41 It has been mentioned in the Calcined dolomite, ferrosilicon 75% (Fe·Si) and fluorite (94 It should be emphasized that as a major component of the briquettes, calcined dolomite has a low thermal conductivity. The porosity of the briquettes would likely to further decrease the thermal conductivity. Therefore heat transfer is an important factor in the silicothermal process. The dimension of briquettes used in the former papers ( The objective of the present experiments was to investigate the influence of CaF An experiment began with furnace power-on to heat the alumina tube to experimental temperature. Then the weighed corundum crucible containing briquettes were charged into the alumina tube from the flange (section 3 shown in It should be emphasized that the air should be substituted with argon before experiments. Because the experiments were carried out isothermally at a temperature higher than 1300 There were three briquettes in the corundum crucible in each experiment and every briquette had one surface facing the alumina tube to absorb the heat of radiation. After experiment, the briquettes were weighed to compare with the weight before experiment to get the extent of magnesium reduction.  The results of typical silicothermic reduction were shown in The increase of temperature would accelerate the reaction rate, that could be explained with the point of reaction thermodynamics. The Gibbs free energy change for the silicothermal reaction was given as Eq. However, the experimental results in the present article were generally higher than that of some investigators. In the present investigation, the briquettes' amount charged in each experiment was limited. As mentioned in the The kinetic equation of solid-state reaction can be described as follows ( It is assumed that the reaction order of reaction Take the integral of formula Eq. According to Arrhenius Eq. In Eq. Box-Lucas fitting results were given in Eq. The fitting curves with different CaF It also can be seen from the figure that the distance between curves was closer at a high temperature than that at a low temperature, which indicated that the increasing of reaction rate by adding CaF In the data fitting section, coefficient In The effect of CaF