The use of cold gas dynamic spraying to produce tungsten carbide based coatings has increased over the past decade [1–8]. Powders may be accelerated to high speeds to produce thick, dense coatings, comparable to some coatings produced using high temperature deposition methods. In the absence of high temperatures, during cold spray, severe plastic deformation of the powder particles are required to ensure good adhesion to the substrate.This is readily achieved when ductile metals such as Ni, Cu, Co and Al are deposited. However WC – which is a hard, brittle material – does not undergo plastic deformation and must therefore be co-deposited with a ductile binder to produce WC-based coatings. Majority of the published cold spray research undertaken uses high pressure systems, while there is limited research available on the use of low pressure cold spray systems to produce hard coatings. While it has been shown that material properties are generally better when using high pressure systems, there are several advantages or benefits to using low pressure systems. The use of low pressure cold spraying is deemed to be economical and versatile, and has been deemed safe and easy to automate. It may also be employed as a portable system to conduct on-site repairs, similar to the use of portable welding machines. The low temperatures and pressures used also ensure that the system is energy efficient, which in certain parts of the world are critical. In the current paper a summary of the research undertaken in our research group to produce WC-Ni coatings using low pressure cold gas dynamic spraying is given. In all the research undertaken to date, a low pressure cold spray machine, Centreline Series P SST, is used with a Comp Air external air compressor having a maximum capacity of 10 Prior to cold spraying, the substrates are grit blasted with alumina to improve coating adhesion. Some researchers have claimed that smoother surfaces may provide better coating properties, but this has not been tested in our research. The embedment of blasting media in the substrate surface continues to be problematic despite the use of extensive ultrasonic cleaning. While this technique ensures a clean surface, the remaining grit particles influence coating adhesion and possibly deposition dynamics. It may be good to consider alternative ‘grit-free’ methods to induce the required level of surface roughness in substrates. The question of an ‘optimum’ or ‘required level’ of surface roughness is an open one. Initial studies on the deposition of WC-Ni coatings was done by blending WC and Ni powders, as well as blending WC-12 The feasibility of producing a hard, wear resistant coating which could be applied to iron-based materials for surface repairs was investigated by blending WC powder (90 The wear properties of WC–Ni coatings were further explored by adding TiC and Mo, and conducting wear tests under slurry abrasion and dry sliding wear conditions The type of substrate used influences the coating properties. A study has been done to compare the properties of WC–Ni coatings deposited onto mild steel and stainless steel substrates Although good results are being achieved thus far for WC–Ni coatings using low pressure cold spray deposition, there are still challenges to address. The low retention of WC particles in the coatings is problematic and ways need to be found to increase the retention in order to provide coatings which can endure industrial operational conditions and which have reasonable service lives. The low retention of the carbides also means that a significant amount of powder is being wasted during deposition, and considering the high cost of WC powder this problem needs a viable and cost effective solution. There are techniques available which may be used, such as mechanical alloying of the powders, or coating the WC powder particles with the binder prior to deposition. In the deposition process itself, the process variables can also be changed such as temperature, gas type and pressure. However if these parameters are increased too much, then the process may no longer be considered a low pressure cold spray system, and the feasibility of using the technique as a cost effective, portable, on-site tool decreases. A second challenge is the WC feedstock powder morphology. It is well known that particle morphology plays a significant role in the deposition process, including adhesion characteristics A third challenge is the adhesion of the cermet coatings to the metallic substrates and adhesion of subsequent coating layers during deposition. While the Ni binder adheres well to the substrate and coating layers due to the plastic deformation it undergoes, the WC particles do not plastically deform, and adhesion becomes problematic. The WC particles have a greater tendency to fracture and erode both the substrate and coating layers. Using finer WC feedstock powders may be a solution, but the powder particle morphology would also need to be improved. Despite the three challenges mentioned above, the mechanical and wear properties of WC–Ni coatings produced using low pressure cold spraying seems to be on par with some of the high temperature coating processes, and in some cases achieving superior properties. The author would like to express gratitude to Prof. Ionel Botef for the use of the cold spray machine for all the collaborative research undertaken. The students who undertake the research are acknowledged for their hard work. The financial support received from the