Background
                  Despite the theoretical advantage of a knee design that can more reliably replicate the medial pivot (MP) of the natural knee, only a few clinical studies have compared the clinical results between the MP prosthesis and another design of prosthesis. We compared the midterm results of total knee arthroplasty (TKA) using an MP prosthesis vs a posterior-stabilized prosthesis via a matched-pair analysis; we included results related to patellofemoral joint symptoms.
               
                  Methods
                  The midterm clinical and radiographic results of 125 consecutive patients (150 knees) who underwent a TKA with the ADVANCE MP prosthesis were compared with those of a control group who had undergone a primary TKA with a posterior-stabilized prosthesis.
               
                  Results
                  Values of the Knee Society’s Knee Scoring System, Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index, and Kujala and Feller scoring systems, as well as the range of motion after TKA, did not significantly differ between the 2 groups. No differences in femorotibial angle and component position, including the patella component, were observed between the 2 groups. No significant differences in the change of patella tilt angle and the postoperative patellar translation were observed between the 2 groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Patients with the MP prosthesis experienced satisfactory pain relief and a functional recovery, providing results similar to those of the posterior-stabilized prosthesis, including the resolution of patellofemoral joint symptoms.Although most contemporary designs for total knee arthroplasty (TKA) prostheses have provided satisfactory pain relief and improved function in most patients, they have yet not reproduced the kinematics of the normal knee, such as femoral rollback and screw-home movement A medial pivot (MP) prosthesis was developed specifically to replicate the normal knee kinematics with minimal medial side motion and lateral side anterior-posterior translation The combination of femoral rollback and MP motion is considered to be the key motion for high flexion of the knee joint The restoration of tibiofemoral kinematics after TKA can minimize the alteration of patellofemoral kinematics We compared the midterm clinical rating scores and radiographic results of TKA using an MP prosthesis vs a posterior-stabilized prosthesis. A matched-pair analysis was used as the method of comparison. The clinical rating scores included the Knee Society’s Knee Scoring System (KSS), the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis (WOMAC) Index, and clinical scores related to the patellofemoral joint symptoms, and the radiographic results included an evaluation of the patella position. It was hypothesized that the clinical and radiographic results, and the complication and revision rates of MP prosthesis would be comparable to or better than the posterior-stabilized prosthesis, especially in patellofemoral joint symptoms. All consecutive patients who underwent a TKA with the ADVANCE MP prosthesis (Wright Medical, Arlington, TN) between March 2002 and December 2008 were included in the study group. During this period, 153 arthroplasties were performed in 128 patients. Three patients were lost to follow-up before the end of 2 years, leaving 150 arthroplasties in 125 patients. For each patient reviewed, we matched a control patient who had undergone a primary TKA with a PFC Sigma (Johnson & Johnson Professional Inc, Raynham, MA) from the database because it was the most commonly used prostheses in our institutions. The MP prosthesis had been selected sporadically by the surgeons during the study period, but there had been no specific indication to select ADVANCE MP prosthesis or the PFC Sigma prosthesis. The matches were made according to age, gender, body mass index (BMI), diagnosis, preoperative range of motion (ROM), severity of preoperative deformity, and operating period. The study was approved by the institutional review board of our hospital. The average age of the study group (MP group) was 66.7 years (range, 42-83 years). Of this total, 121 were female and 4 were male. The mean BMI was 26.4 kg/m The clinical scores have been recorded in charts and our database, and they were collected from detailed reviews of chart and data. The clinical results were evaluated at the preoperative and final follow-up periods using various clinical scoring systems, including the Knee Society’s KSS and the WOMAC Index. Clinical results related to patellofemoral joint symptoms were evaluated using the Kujala Preoperative and final follow-up anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were obtained to assess the limb alignment and component positioning. Measurements were taken from these images using a picture-acquiring communication system. Afterward, the measurements were evaluated to provide radiographic results including the femorotibial angle and the method used by the American Knee Society to determine the The presence of complications or the need for any additional surgery following the primary TKA was reviewed. The midterm survival rates were also analyzed. The clinical and radiographic results preoperatively and at the final follow-up visit were compared between the MP and posterior-stabilized groups (Student Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS (Chicago, IL) version 18.0, and All TKAs were carried out by the 2 senior authors (DKB and SDC) who had been performing more than 300 cases annually. The surgical principles and postoperative rehabilitation protocol were similar between MP and posterior-stabilized groups. A tourniquet was used in all cases. A midline skin incision was used with a medial parapatellar capsular incision. The bone cuts were made with a measured resection and a carefully planned soft-tissue technique. Intramedullary guide was used for the femoral resection, and the transepicondylar axis was used to position the anteroposterior femoral cutting guide system for the femoral component rotation. We resected approximately 7-8 mm of bone to achieve a tibial cut surface that was perpendicular to the shaft of the tibia in the coronal plane. The tibial slope was usually set to 2°-3° of posterior slope in the sagittal plane during the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL)–substituting procedure in both the MP and posterior-stabilized groups. It was usually set to 5° of posterior slope during the PCL-retaining procedure in the MP group. Any contracted medial or lateral soft tissue was carefully evaluated with palpation and then selectively released where required to balance the knee. In addition, the flexion and extension gaps were checked with a spacer block or trial component. When there was flexion tightness, lift off, and/or disturbance of rollback during the PCL-retaining procedure for MP prosthesis, PCL fibers were recessed and the posterior slope of the tibia was increased. If the retained PCL is difficult or impossible to maintain appropriate tension and obtain accurate balance of the gaps, the MP prosthesis was implanted with complete resection of the PCL. There were 75 knees of PCL-retaining and 75 knees of PCL-sacrificing in the MP group. A similar strategy was taken with increasing the tibial slope when there was flexion tightness for posterior-stabilized prosthesis. All patellae were resurfaced, and all implants were cemented after pulsed lavage and drying. Isometric exercises using the extensor and flexor muscles were initiated shortly after the operation. The Hemovac drain inserted during surgery was removed on the second postoperative day, followed by the initiation of active and assisted ROM exercise. At postoperative day 5 to 6, the patients were mobilized with crutches until 6 weeks. Full weight-bearing ambulation is started at 5 days to the extent that the patient’s condition permits. There was no case in which it was necessary to perform the lateral retinacular release intraoperatively because of the patellofemoral maltracking and to manipulate under anesthesia postoperatively because of postoperative ROM limitation. When analyzing the clinical results of the MP group, the average KSS increased from 59.9 ± 7.5 before surgery to 90.0 ± 6.6 at the final follow-up ( Regarding radiographic results, the average preoperative and postoperative femorotibial angle did not differ significantly between the groups ( Postoperative complications occurred in 5 knees in the MP group and 2 knees in the posterior-stabilized group ( For the 2 knees with complications in the posterior-stabilized group, there were 1 loosening and 1 periprosthetic femoral fracture. The loosening of the femoral component was successfully treated with a revision TKA using a stemmed femoral component. For the supracondylar fracture of the femur, open reduction and internal fixation with a locking compression plate were performed. Two knees in the MP group and one in the posterior-stabilized group underwent revision TKAs with removal of the components. The 8-year survival rate was 98.6% (95% confidence interval, 98.54%-98.58%) in the MP group and 99.3% (95% confidence interval, 99.23%-99.27%) in the posterior-stabilized group ( The most important finding of the present study was that the improvement of the clinical scores and radiographic results including patellofemoral joint symptoms and survival rates were similar between the MP and posterior-stabilized groups, with a low incidence of patellofemoral complications. Actually, the average further flexion angle at the last follow-up was significantly greater in the posterior-stabilized group, and the average Kujala score at the last follow-up was significantly better in the MP group ( Some previous studies have compared the results of TKAs using the MP prosthesis against other implant designs Patellofemoral problems are common complications after TKA, and an inferior prosthetic design may contribute toward this issue Only a few studies have compared the survival rate between the MP prosthesis and another design of prosthesis This study is limited by being a retrospective study of case series by 2 surgeons. However, its strength lies in the fact that we tried to match the study and control groups according to various preoperative demographic data. The study also had a relatively large number of patients from an independent center and a high rate of follow-up. The MP group was compared with the group using the posterior-stabilized prosthesis which has been mainly used in our institutions. There was no difference of indication for the specific prosthesis in the present study, and matched pair analysis could make the comparative analysis of 2 groups with similar preoperative demographics. The prostheses had been selected preoperatively by the surgeons’ decision, but there had been no specific indication for ADVANCE MP prosthesis instead of the PFC Sigma prosthesis. In summary, patients who had undergone surgery with the MP prosthesis experienced satisfactory pain relief and functional recovery, similar to the results of the posterior-stabilized design. The clinical and radiographic results related to the patellofemoral joint symptoms and the complication rate were comparable between the MP and posterior-stabilized groups. Conflict of Interest Statements