Background
                  The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical and radiographic outcomes of a transosseous suture fixation technique for the treatment of unstable lateral clavicle fractures. The appropriate treatment for lateral clavicle fractures is controversial. Many authors have argued for nonsurgical treatment of these injuries; however, recent literature has shown a role for the surgical treatment of unstable fractures. The paucity of lateral clavicular bone and the unique anatomy of this area of the shoulder makes surgical treatment of these injuries challenging. This article reports a single-surgeon experience with a transosseous suture fixation technique for the treatment of unstable lateral clavicle fractures.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  A retrospective review of all patients with unstable lateral clavicle fractures treated with a transosseous suture technique from 2015-2018 was performed. The indication for surgery was significant displacement between the main medial and lateral clavicle fragments. The surgical technique used was a modification of the technique as described by Levy. Patients were followed postoperatively with active and passive range of motion (ROM) measurements, strength testing, and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons Standardized Shoulder Assessment Form score, visual analog scale score, and standard radiographs. Patients were followed to radiographic union.
               
                  Results
                  Twelve patients underwent surgical fixation of unstable lateral clavicle fractures from 2015-2018. All patients had excellent function, full ROM, minimal pain, and improved functional scores at final follow-up. Eleven patients achieved complete union of the fracture. One patient healed with a fibrous union; however, the fracture had maintained alignment and the patient was asymptomatic and satisfied with the result. No patient required a second surgery.
               
                  Conclusion
                  We found that the transosseous suture technique for fixation is an effective treatment for unstable lateral clavicle fracture. This technique is reproducible, cost effective, and limits the need for revision surgery often encountered with other techniques.Fractures of the distal or lateral third of the clavicle are relatively rare, and the appropriate treatment of these fractures is controversial. Distal clavicle fractures account for 12%-28% of all clavicle fractures. Historically, nonoperative treatment has been the preferred treatment for lateral clavicle fractures. Clinical experience suggested that most distal clavicle fractures healed; additionally, if a fracture were to proceed to nonunion, these patients are generally asymptomatic. Multiple methods of fixation have been described, with each technique having its advantages and disadvantages. A retrospective review of all patients with unstable lateral clavicle fractures treated with a transosseous suture technique from 2015-2018 was performed. Criteria for inclusion in the study were radiographic evidence of a displaced or unstable lateral clavicle fractures, Neer type II or V, Patients were followed postoperatively with active and passive range of motion (ROM) measurements, strength testing, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons Standardized Shoulder Assessment Form (ASES) and visual analog scale (VAS) scores, and standard radiographs. Patients were followed to radiographic union. All patients were followed at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months. Radiographs were obtained until radiographic union or until 12 months. If there was no union at 12 months, the fracture was classified as a nonunion per Neer's criteria. Time from initial injury to surgery, time to fracture union, and ASES and VAS scores were collected. Abduction, forward elevation, external rotation, and internal rotation ROM measurements was collected. Motor strength was measured for abduction, external rotation, and internal rotation and rated on the standard 5/5 scale. The incidence of complications were recorded for each patient. Complications were defined as an event during the postoperative period that threatened the outcome and required additional and nonroutine intervention. Standard radiographs included an anteroposterior clavicle, anteroposterior up-tilt clavicle view, and a shoulder girdle view. Radiographs were evaluated for radiographic union as well as restoration and maintenance of the coracoclavicular distance. Coracoclavicular distance was measured on the initial shoulder girdle view. The contralateral shoulder was used as a baseline. Initial coracoclavicular distance was measured on the injury film from the inferior cortex of the clavicle to the superior cortex of the coracoid ( The surgical technique used was a modification of the technique as described by Levy. Patients were immobilized in a sling for 6 weeks postoperatively. Pendulum exercises were allowed for activities of daily living. At week 6, the sling was discontinued, and the patients were given a home exercises program consisting of passive, active assist, and active ROM exercises. At week 12, the patients were given a progressive strengthening program. From 2013-2018, a total of 14 patients underwent an all-suture fixation of a lateral clavicle fracture. Twelve patients met inclusion criteria. Average age was 44.8 years (range 26-76). Nine male and 3 female patients underwent surgery. There were 7 type II and 5 type V fractures ( The average duration of follow-up was 36.4 months (6-72 months). Eleven patients went on to full radiographic union and 1 patient went on to nonunion. Because of the small number of patients in our series and the fact that there was only 1 nonunion, a statistical analysis could not be performed comparing the 2 groups. The coracoclavicular distance could be restored to that of the contralateral side in all 12 cases. The average initial preoperative coracoclavicular distance was 25.9 mm. The average postoperative coracoclavicular distance was 12.9 mm ( All patients had a good clinical outcome and had significant improvement in pain levels. The average preoperative VAS score was 7.1 (3-10). The average postoperative VAS was 0.4 (0-1). The final average ASES score for all patients was 96.2. All patients regained full active and passive ROM and 5/5 motor strength in all planes. The average time to regain full ROM was 4.7 months (1.5-18). The united fractures regained full ROM at an average of 3.1 months (1.5-6), and the nonunion regained full ROM at 18 months. For patients in which the fracture united, the average ASES score was 98. For the patient with the nonunion, the ASES score was 87. There was a difference between the final ASES scores in patients younger than 40 years (98.3) compared with those older than 40 years (90.2), although this difference did not reach statistical significance ( This article shows that transosseous suture fixation is a safe and effective treatment for unstable distal clavicle fractures. Fractures treated with this technique achieved a high rate of union, with patients achieving excellent functional outcomes and a low rate of complications. The surgical treatment of lateral clavicle fractures is technically challenging, and a variety of fixation constructs have been used, with varying degrees of success. Given the nature of the injury, there is a paucity of bone on the lateral fragment of the fracture. In what little bone is present in the lateral fragment, there is often varying degrees of comminution, presenting significant challenges in creating a secure fixation construct. These challenges have been reflected in the literature, with numerous studies citing complications related to failure of implants. Neer initially described fixation with wires. This technique proved problematic because of wire migration endangering neurovascular structures, as well as elevated rates of infection. Techniques using fixation to the coracoid have also been described. Techniques using transclavicular cannulated screw fixation to the coracoid has been reported. At best, this technique mandated a planned second surgery for intact screw removal. At worst, the second surgery was required to remove a fracture screw. Levy initially described a minimally invasive transosseous suture technique to treat lateral clavicle fractures. This study suffers from the usual limitations of a retrospective case series on the treatment of a relatively rare injury. The study was limited to the clinical experience of a single surgeon, and the number of patients in the study was small. There was no nonoperative control group, and there was no randomized trial comparing this technique to a different technique. Nevertheless, this article reports an often unrecognized technique that can be useful in the treatment of patients with this injury. The transosseous suture technique is an effective treatment for unstable lateral clavicle fractures. It allowed for a high rate of union, excellent functional outcomes, and a low rate of complications. In addition, the technique is reproducible, cost effective, and limits the need for revision surgery often encountered with techniques involving metal implants. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.