A microbial method using baker's yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) was developed to collect aqueous Pd(II) ions through bioreductive deposition and biosorption at room temperature. Resting cells of S. cerevisiae reduced 1.0 mol/m3 aqueous Pd(II) ions in a Na2PdCl4 solution to metallic Pd(0) at pH 7.0 within 60 min when formate was provided as the electron donor under anaerobic conditions. Palladium nanoparticles were deposited on the surface of S. cerevisiae cells. The yeast cells also exhibited an excellent ability to collect Pd(II) ions from a 1.0 mol/m3 aqueous solution at pH 1.0 within 30 min under air. The baker's yeast was also applied to the effective recovery of aqueous Pd(II) ions in 1000–2000 mol/m3 HNO3 solutions (pH −0.3 to 0.0). When processing electroplating solutions, the yeast cells were able to selectively collect soluble Pd(II) at pH 0.0–0.8 within 60 min. Our proposal of using commercially available baker's yeast as a biosorbent enables rapid and efficient recovery of soluble palladium over the pH range − 0.30 to 7.0.Palladium and platinum are the most commonly used platinum group metals. The primary use of palladium is in car and track emission-control catalysts, electronic goods, dental alloys, and chemical process catalysts ( Microorganisms are used to separate and concentrate aqueous Pd(II) ions from dilute solutions into microbial cells at room temperature. Previous work has investigated using several types of microorganisms to reduce Pd(II) ions to metallic Pd(0) nanoparticles at neutral pH values under anaerobic conditions, which is a process known as bioreductive deposition or biomineralization. These microorganisms include (i) sulfate-reducing bacteria from the As an alternative to separation and concentration, various microorganisms can be applied as biomaterials to adsorb aqueous Pd(II) ions, which is a process known as biosorption ( Recently, we demonstrated the use of baker's yeast ( In this work, we applied  In addition, further washed Aqueous Pd(II) solutions were prepared by dissolving known masses of Na An anaerobic glovebox was used to perform bioreduction experiments as described previously ( Biogenic particles and Thin sections of In a typical biosorption experiment at 33 °C, 5 cm In some biosorption runs at 33 °C under air,  To confirm the reductive deposition of palladium, Thin sections of the The bioreductive deposition process may be broken down into two steps: (1) uptake of aqueous Pd(II) ions onto the yeast cells, and (2) bioreduction of Pd(II) ions to metallic Pd(0) with formate as the electron donor. The The recovery of aqueous Pd(II) ions by The point of zero charge for Biosorption runs at pH 1.0 were carried out at different cell concentrations to investigate the effect on the Pd(II) biosorption rate at 33 °C. Biosorption experiments were performed to examine the applicability of the commercial baker's yeast to the recovery of aqueous Pd(II) ions from aqueous HNO   The baker's yeast None. Funding: this work was supported by