Background
                  We report the short-term results of a cohort of patients undergoing radial head replacement using a novel radial head prosthesis with a smooth, unfixed, telescoping stem and a bipolar design after a mean follow-up of 34 months (range, 24-48 months).
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Patients were assessed using clinical and radiographic examination as well as with standardized outcome measures. Thirty implants (29 patients) were available for review.
               
                  Results
                  At final follow-up, the average Mayo Elbow Performance Index Score was 92.1 and the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand Score was 13.8. Clinical examination revealed significant differences between operative and nonoperative sides for flexion/extension and pronation/supination. Radiographic measurement of medial and lateral ulnohumeral spaces revealed re-establishment of a congruent elbow joint. No significant arthritic changes were identified at the radiocapitellar joint. Minimal angular migration of the implant in the proximal radial shaft was observed over time. Complications included 1 patient requiring temporary placement of a hinged external fixator for instability and 1 patient requiring revision surgery at 4 weeks.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This review demonstrates that a bipolar radial head prosthesis with a smooth stem and telescoping neck effectively restores stability to elbows with a comminuted radial head fracture and valgus instability. To date, this is the largest reported outcome analysis of bipolar radial head replacement in the literature.Radial head and neck fractures are common orthopedic injuries. They are estimated to account for 1.7% to 5.4% of all fractures The treatment goals for radial head fractures are to restore elbow stability, preserve elbow motion, restore forearm rotation, and maintain the length of the radius. A variety of radial head replacements are currently available. Fragmentation of silicone implants The Katalyst Radial Head (Integra, Plainsboro, NJ, USA) is a bipolar implant with a smooth telescoping stem. The stem design allows for the precise restoration of radial column “length” in situ, without the need to release the lateral collateral ligament and common extensor origin when they are intact. This study reports the early clinical outcome of patients who underwent radial head replacement with this implant. Between March 2004 and October 2006, 36 prostheses were placed in 34 patients (21 women, 13 men) at Allegheny General Hospital (AGH) or Rush University Medical Center (RUMC). The radial head was resected in all individuals, followed by replacement arthroplasty with the Katalyst bipolar implant. Replacement arthroplasty was required in 27 patients after acute fracture or fracture-dislocation where the radial head was deemed irreparable at the time of surgery and in 7 patients for post-traumatic arthritis or in the setting of elbow reconstruction indicated by failed previous surgery or fixation at other institutions. Each patient agreed to participate in the study, with an understanding of the research protocol. Radial head arthroplasty was performed in those cases after acute trauma where the radial head could not be repaired and there was associated valgus laxity of the elbow. There were 4 patients in this series with acute longitudinal instability of the forearm. Radial head arthroplasty was also performed after late radial head resection done for post-traumatic arthritis where there was residual valgus laxity of the elbow ( The surgical technique consisted of a lateral, ligament-sparing approach in which the extensor tendon origin and lateral ligament were incised at the midline of the radiocapitellar axis. The radial head was sectioned with a saw, and the appropriate diameter implant was chosen. Implant length was carefully measured using the cutting guide system with the ulnohumeral joint reduced. Intraoperative clinical and radiographic parameters were assessed. The head size varied from 18 to 24 mm in diameter, and the head offset from the stem was between 1 and 3 mm, depending on the radiocapitellar gap to be restored. Formal lateral collateral ligament repair was required in 15 patients due to acute instability, 5 patients underwent concomitant open reduction and internal fixation of an olecranon fracture, and 3 required open reduction of the coronoid. Prophylaxis with indomethacin (75 mg/day) for heterotopic ossification was administered to each patient undergoing surgery at RUMC, but not to patients undergoing surgery at AGH. All patients were immobilized initially in a long arm splint. Motion was initiated within 7 to 10 days in all cases. For those with instability noted at surgery requiring ligament repair, elbow flexion and extension was performed with the shoulder adducted and the elbow at the patient’s side to protect the joint from varus stress. These restrictions were lifted at 6 weeks postoperatively. Patients were monitored with serial examinations and radiographs. At a minimum of 2 years after surgery, all patients were evaluated for the purposes of this study. Patients completed a Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI), a 10-point visual analog scale (VAS) pain score (0 = no pain; 10 = severe pain), and a Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) survey. The clinical evaluations were completed by an independent examiner. Standardized neutral rotation frontal and lateral radiographs of the affected elbow and wrist, as well as the contralateral elbow and wrist, were obtained. Radiographs for ulnar variance of the wrist were taken with the shoulder abducted, the elbow flexed to 90°, and the forearm in neutral rotation. Radiographs were analyzed and recordings made of the lateral and medial ulnohumeral space, degree of proximal radial migration, change in position of the implant stem within the canal, lucency about the prosthetic stem, bone spur formation, heterotopic bone formation, and sclerosis/radiolucency at the radiocapitellar and ulnohumeral joints. Six distinct quantities allowed direct comparison between affected and unaffected elbows. The kinematic measures of flexion/extension arc, supination, and pronation range of motion and the radiographic measures of medial ulnohumeral space, lateral ulnohumeral space, and proximal migration of the radial shaft, as measured at the distal radioulnar joint, provided direct means to evaluate outcome. Paired Of the 36 implants, 30 were available for review and constitute the cohort evaluated in this study. Follow-up averaged 34 months (range, 24-48 months). Average scores for the entire cohort were MEPI, 92.1 (range, 65-100); VAS for pain, 1.4 (range, 0-5); and DASH, 13.8 (range 0-52.5). When broken down into the 23 procedures performed for acute injury vs the 7 performed for chronic conditions (ie, previous surgeries, elbow reconstruction, arthritis), the mean MEPI score showed the chronic group had poorer than the acute group (94.6 vs 85.0; Clinical evaluation revealed an average flexion/extension arc of 126° (range, 95°-150°) in the affected elbow. Forearm pronation averaged 69° (range, 45°-90°), and supination averaged 74° degrees (range, 60°-85°). In comparison, the unaffected elbow measured an average flexion/extension arc of 138° (range 120°-150°), an average pronation of 72° (range, 45°-90°), and an average supination of 80° (range, 60°-85°). The difference in range of motion between the affected and unaffected arms for flexion/extension arc, pronation, and supination was statistically significant ( Analysis of orthogonal radiographs of affected and unaffected elbows revealed an average lateral ulnohumeral space of 2.71 mm (range, 0.5-5.1 mm) on the operative side compared with 2.72 mm (range, 1.0-6.3 mm) on the unaffected side, but the difference was not significant ( Wrist radiographs revealed an average proximal migration of the radius of 0.34 mm (range, –3.2 to 4.4 mm) on the affected side compared with an average ulnar-positive variance of 0.26 mm (range, –4.0 to 1.8 mm) on the unaffected side, which was statistically significant ( Note was made of a patient (D.M.) who had a positive ulnar variance of 4.4 mm on the affected wrist. At the most recent follow-up, he was satisfied, reported no wrist pain, had excellent function and range of motion of the elbow, and reported a VAS score of 2. His wrist variance was symmetrical with his asymptomatic contralateral wrist. Further analysis of the radiographs revealed minimal ulnohumeral bone spurs in the elbows of 22 patients, small degrees of non–motion-limiting calcification in 13, and stem lucency in 24 ( Complications in 2 patients were significant enough to require repeat surgery. In the first patient, who was treated early in the series, the radiocapitellar joint was overstuffed. The intraoperative cutting guide was used improperly, and an extra 2 mm was added to the neck length. The resultant overstuffing was recognized with a combination of postoperative radiographs and a clinical examination that demonstrated a loss of elbow flexion. The problem was easily corrected. The set screw on the adjustable neck was removed, the neck was shortened 2 mm, and the set screw was reinserted. The implant tray now contains wands upon which are the 6 combinations of head diameter and neck length. These wands can be used to trial the head diameter and neck length to avoid this complication. The second patient had a grossly unstable elbow. During repair of the lateral complex, the elbow translated medially due to an incompetent anterior and posterior capsule and medial collateral ligament. This translation was not recognized on intraoperative radiographs but was clearly apparent on postoperative radiographs. Although this was not a failure of the implant, it did constitute a failure to recognize the translation, a situation that would have been avoidable with better intraoperative imaging. This patient was treated with reduction and stabilization of the joint with a hinged external fixator that was used for 5.5 weeks. This patient went on to an excellent outcome , with 110° of elbow range of motion, 185° of forearm rotation, VAS of 2, MEPI of 85, and DASH of 46. Neither complication was deemed specifically related to the implant. A variety of implants have been used to replace the radial head. These include those made of ferrule caps, The bipolar Katalyst implant has a smooth, stainless steel stem. Within the stem is a telescoping shaft with fluted walls that provide a surface to engage a set screw to fix the shaft in a distracted position. The proximal end of the telescoping shaft contains a ball that couples with the polyethylene liner of the head to allow assembly of the head to shaft in situ. This coupling is a “snap fit,” which makes in situ assembly easy. The stem was designed to be a smooth, “loose” fit within the canal. This was chosen due to what seemed to be excellent results with a similar stem in a monoblock head (Wright Medical, Arlington, TX, USA). Since this implant’s conception more than 10 years ago, the “loose,” smooth stem design has held up well in long-term follow-up. The polyethylene–stem-coupling mechanism allows in situ assembly. Polyethylene wear is a concern in any implant. To date, we have not had the chance to retrieve an implant that has been in place for more than 7 weeks. Although polyethylene wear could become an issue, it has not been apparent clinically or on radiographs. With rotational loads shared between the stem and the proximal radius, the stem and polyethylene liner, and the head and the capitellum, we expect that the stresses seen at the stem/polyethylene interface are relatively low. The polyethylene–stem connection is also the heart of the bipolar nature of the implant. Conflicting data have been reported on the function of bipolar prostheses compared with unipolar designs. Using a cadaveric model, Moon et al How long the Katalyst implant retains its bipolar nature is unknown and is currently a subject of investigation in our institutions. Regardless, we believe that the most important factor in treating elbow fracture-dislocations is management of the ligaments, a factor that far exceeds the importance of the hardware. Implant dissociation at the polyethylene–stem interface is another potential concern; however, this connection has held up well in the 7 years since the first implant was placed. There was no instance in this series where the head dissociated from the stem. In our experience, the coupling is very secure if a loud “snap” is heard when the head is coupled to the stem, the elbow is not overstuffed, and when the lateral complex is intact or repaired. This report reviews the clinical experience with a bipolar implant for a variety of pathologic conditions, including high-energy trauma. The implant has a telescoping smooth stem design with a bipolar neck. Several head diameters are available, and implant length can be adjusted in 2-mm increments in situ. At a minimum 2-year follow-up, no major complications were identified specifically related to the implant. Radiographic and clinical evaluations revealed re-establishment of a congruous elbow joint in post-traumatic and reconstructive applications, although function as assessed by MEPI was better in the acutely post-traumatic setting than in reconstructive cases. There was no evidence of capitellar osteopenia, significant proximal radial translation, or migration of the implant. Patients recovered a similar range of motion between affected and unaffected elbows. Outcomes in this series were optimized by recognition and treatment of the complete injury complex, including associated fractures and collateral ligament insufficiency. Further study will be required to see if these short-term results are maintained over time. Support for this study was obtained from The Pittsburgh Foundation. Integra LifeSciences Corporation (Plainsboro, NJ) provided funding that assisted in data collection. Drs Baratz and Cohen receive royalties and institutional research support for this project, and are consultants for Integra LifeSciences Corporation. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.