The water contained in lignite generally exists in various forms and the energy required to remove them from coal is also different. Thus, two different rank lignites with different water contents from Yunnan and Inner Mongolia provinces in China were selected for analyses of water forms and dewatering energy consumption. The forms of water contained in these two lignites were classified using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). The results show that the water in the lignite mainly contains freezable water and non-freezable water, and further the freezable water can be divided into free water and freezable bound water. The water above 40% moisture content of dry coal weight in coal sample is free water; that between 27% and 40% of dry coal weight is freezable bound water; and that less than 27% of dry coal weight is non-freezable water, which is nearly independent of coal rank. Then, the microwave drying and the fixed bed drying devices were employed to dry these two lignites, and the dewatering energy consumption during drying processes were measured and calculated to compare the change of energy consumption for removing different types of water. The results show that 500–600 W microwave field is suitable for drying lignite because the water is difficult to be completely removed under 450 W and slight pyrolysis is prone to occur for lignite when the microwave power is higher than 700 W. The dewatering energy consumption of total moisture in microwave field under 500–600 W is 8.6–15.3 kJ/g H2O, and those of freezable water and non-freezable water are 8.7–12.5 kJ/g H2O and 8.5–21.8 kJ/g H2O respectively. In addition, the dewatering energy consumption of 50 g lignite in fixed bed drying at 120–160 °C is 1.3–3.6 kJ/g H2O. In order to take advantages of microwave and fixed bed, these two methods are coupled to dry lignite for reducing energy consumption and improving drying efficiency. For the best compromise between drying energy and drying time, it is recommended to use 600 W power microwave field to remove free water in lignite, and then to use the fixed bed to remove the remaining water at 160 °C. The water re-adsorption amount of the upgraded coal is about 1/3 lower than that of raw coal.With the large consumption of high quality coal in China, the application of low-rank coal, such as lignite, has attracted increasing attention. China is abundant in lignite resources, but high water content of lignite results in lower calorific value and higher transportation expense The characteristics of moisture in lignite have a great influence on the dewatering process, and some scholars have conducted extensive research on the moisture forms in lignite For the dewatering technologies, they include mainly fixed bed drying A lignite from Inner Mongolia (NM) and a lignite from Yunnan (YN) province in China were used in this study. The two raw coals were ground and sieved to the particle size with the range of 0.38–0.83 mm in a nitrogen glove box to avoid oxidation. The proximate and ultimate analyses results are shown in Moreover, the moisture content of NM lignite is relatively low. It is necessary to humidify NM lignite when DSC is used to classify water forms in it. First, about 200 g NM lignite was weighed, added to 600 mL deionized water and kept at room temperature for 45 min. The lignite cake was obtained by filtration, and the total moisture content of the NM lignite cake was measured to be about 48% (92.31% of dry coal weight). This humidified NM lignite was sealed in a brown bottle and placed in a cool place for further use. For the preparation of lignite sample with different moisture contents, the YN raw lignite and humidified NM lignite were put into a chamber which could control the desired humidity, to reach the moisture equilibrium. The moisture content in coal samples was adjusted by the humidity in the chamber. The amounts of different forms of water were determined with the help of DSC204HP (Netzsch, Germany). For each run, 8 mg coal sample was weighed into an aluminum pan, and nitrogen was used as the carrier gas with the flow rate of 50 mL/min. Firstly, the sample was cooled down from 20 °C to −70 °C with the cooling rate of 3 °C/min. Secondly, it was kept at −70 °C for 5 min, and thirdly was heated up to 180 °C with the heating rate of 3 °C/min. The cooling and heating rates used are based on the statement that the quantity of heat evolved during DSC experiments is independent of the cooling rate in the range of 2–8 °C/min The schematic of the microwave drying equipment is shown in During the microwave drying process, the energy consumption for removing moisture was determined by a watt hour meter, and the sample temperature was measured by an infrared thermometer. Before experiments, the temperature was calibrated, and the calibration result is shown in The weight loss of lignite For the energy determination, the input electrical energy was measured by a watt hour meter with detection accuracy of 0.001 kW·h. The energy measured by watt hour meter during dewatering of lignite ( The energy consumption for the removal of non-freezable water ( The energy consumption for the removal of freezable water in lignite ( The fixed bed drying apparatus, shown in For the drying, the fixed bed was firstly heated to the desired temperature with the heating rate of 10 °C/min. It took about 40 min for the temperature in the center of reactor to be stabilized at the set temperature, as shown in The water contained in lignite can be classified as freezing or non-freezing A series of YN and NM coal samples with different water contents were prepared and their DSC curves during cooling under N In the same way, from the DSC curves shown in In summary, the DSC curves for YN and NM lignites with different water contents show that the water in these lignites can be divided into non-freezable, freezable bound and free water. The freezable water can be divided into free water and freezable bound water. The part of water above 40% db moisture content is free water; that in the range of 27–40% db is freezable bound water; and less than 27% db is non-freezable water. As illustrated in For NM raw coal, the maximum set temperature is reached even in a 450 W microwave field ( Therefore, to investigate the removal of different forms of water without interference from loss of volatiles, NM lignite was soaked in pure water to raise its water content from 43% db to 92% db. The drying characteristics of the wetted coal are shown in The fixed bed drying characteristics of YN and NM lignites at different temperatures under N Microwave drying has advantages of high drying rate, high heating efficiency for good microwave absorbers, quick startup and shutdown, and low environmental pollution   The disadvantages of microwave drying are higher energy consumption and the possibility of pyrolysis when the water content is low. The disadvantage of fixed-bed drying is that it is relatively slow. The combination of microwave drying and fixed bed drying not only can reduce the energy consumption of the drying process, but also can improve the drying efficiency. Moreover, the release of volatiles from the lignite during the drying process and the potential of combustion can also be avoided. The effect of different coupling strategies on the drying characteristics of YN lignite is shown in As shown in As listed in The moisture readsorption experiments were carried out on YN raw lignite and the dried coals obtained by different upgrading methods under different relative humidity (RH) at 30 °C, and the results are shown in The freezable water in Yunnan and Inner Mongolia lignites can be divided into free water and freezable bound water. More than 40% db of water is free water; 27%-40% db is freezable bound water; and less than 27% db is non-freezable water, correspondingly consuming different energy for removing them from lignite. It is difficult to completely dry the lignite in 450 W microwave field. When the microwave power is larger than 700 W, the lignite is prone to slight pyrolysis. Drying 50 g lignite in microwave field under 500–600 W, the dewatering energy of total moisture is 8.6–15.3 kJ/g H To save drying energy and time, it is recommended to use microwave drying to remove free water first and then to use the fixed bed drying to remove the remaining water. The water re-absorption capacity of the upgraded coal is about 1/3 than that of raw coal. The authors extend their thanks to the financial supports of