In his research, a modified Dynamic Causal Diagram (DCD) based process operating performance optimality assessment and non-optimal cause identification method is proposed to handle the online assessment of the complicated chemical processes, where certainties and uncertainties coexist. In addition, the multi-source information usage problem of the traditional DCD is addressed. In the online application, a newly developed scheme is developed, which distinguishes stable performance grade and grades switch transition. For the non-optimal performances, a contribution based root cause identification method is developed, on the framework of the constructed DCD. Finally, the operating performance of a gold hydrometallurgy process is assessed by both the traditional DCD and the modified DCD. The superiority on accuracy and robustness of the modified DCD is demonstrated, and the responsible events for non-optimality is successfully isolated by the proposed contribution based non-optimal cause identification technique.With the rapid development of industrial production technology in the past several decades, the demand for quality and benefits of products increases accordingly. Optimal operating performance is helpful to improve economic benefit, manage production, avoid environmental pollution, and ensure efficient production. On condition of safety, process operating performance optimality assessment (POPOA) further assesses the optimal degree of process operating status and gives guidance on non-optimality causes. Compared to the traditional process monitoring which portions the process into normal and abnormal situations, POPOA further divides the normal situation into several grades, such as optimal, medium and poor, under synthetically consideration of the quality, raw material costs, and energy consumption etc. Therefore, POPOA has become a key issue that has gained tremendous attention from both academia and industry recently. In general, process operating performance finally reflects on Comprehensive Economic Benefit (CEB), which is a balance between the quality and cost. It is reasonable to take CEB as comprehensive assessing index for POPOA. According to the state of CEB, operating performance is classified into multiple grades, such as optimal, good, medium, not bad, and poor grades. The CEB can be viewed as being the higher the better. Factories pursue the optimal operating performance grade during production, to achieve the highest CEB. Multivariate statistical methods based POPOA techniques are intensively investigated due to the development of the measurement techniques ( In an actual industrial production process, coexistence of certainties and uncertainties is common. In the following content, the variables that are measured with high Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) are called certain variables. Meanwhile, the variables that are measured with low SNR or judged through subjective interpretation like semantic descriptions are called uncertain variables. To handle such uncertainties, some qualitative approaches are employed, such as process hazards analysis ( Another kind of methods to tackle uncertainties is based on the probabilistic framework, such as Belief Network (BN) ( Information fusion problem has been deeply researched with the increase in the amount of available information sources. It aims at combining multi-source information to form consistent explanation or description. A large number of the researches have been reported to data fusion technologies on Bayesian theory ( This research mainly concentrates on POPOA problems with multi-source information, where certainties and uncertainties coexist. To address this problem, a modified reasoning approach based on DCD for POPOA is developed in this study. The main contributions of this research are as follows: The traditional DCD is extended to solve its essential problems that it cannot combine multi-source information. When a node can be measured online as well as derived through its father nodes, the modified DCD can make full use of both information sources. The certain and uncertain variables are handled separately to preserve useful information as much as possible. Hard partition of the states is avoided for certain variables in this article. A novel online assessing strategy is developed to distinguish the stable performance grade and performance grade shifting transition. A contribution based non-optimal root cause identification approach is further proposed to identify the reason for the non-optimal performance. The proposed approach is successfully applied to a gold hydrometallurgy process. Compared to the assessment result of the traditional DCD, the superiority of the novel approach is illustrated. The remainder of this article is organized as below. Primary techniques to be utilized in this research are briefly revisited in Section This research is aimed at implementing POPOA with multi-source information under coexistence of certainties and uncertainties. Certainties indicate the information that is deterministic or achieved with high SNR. Uncertainties mainly include the following two kinds: (1) the measurement uncertainty with low SNR; (2) subjective interpretation or estimation of the variable. In actual production processes, certain and uncertain information are usually mixed together. Such coexistence renders the traditional POPOA methods inappropriate. For uncertain variables, online information may come from different information sources, like online measurements from different sensors, inference through the effecting variables, and so on. It is hard to judge if one single information source reflects the variable’s state truthfully, because any one of the information source is uncertain. Determining the performance of an uncertain plant within a single aspect is incomplete. It is better to fuse multi-source information to form a relatively reliable result. To address the above issues, a novel approach is proposed in this research, and the basic techniques are briefly introduced in this section. The uncertainty is a crucial issue to be addressed in the actual POPOA. The probabilistic framework based method is a most widely used technique to handle uncertain information. To avoid the determination of the joint probability which requires large amounts of computation, DCD emerges. Developed from BN, DCD is more suitable for complicated processes which lacks prior knowledge. The parameters are relatively easier to be learned, and intricate logics are illustrated easily. The DCD can be either based on events or event variables. The term ‘variable’ indicates an event variable that consists of a group of mutually exclusive and complementary events. Each event represents an instance or a state of a variable. The variable based DCD is introduced then. The event based DCD is a special case of the variable based DCD. As shown in Box: a root event variable that does not have any parent nodes. Circle: a node event variable that has at least one parent node. Gate: a logic operator that switches a series of inputs into a single output, e.g. AND, OR, etc. Directed arc: a linkage event variable that describes the causal intensity between the parent and child nodes. The arcs pointing to one node without any gates are in an OR relationship. All the root event variables and linkage event variables are independent in DCD. Their probabilities are supposed to be known, which can be easily obtained from the subjective belief or historic data analysis. The letters used in DCD theory are explained as follows (      An arc without a letter on it implies that the father node and the child node have the same number of states, and the probability of the linkage event variable is a unit matrix. Assume that During the probabilistic reasoning under the framework of DCD, Cut Set (CS) needs to be outlined at first. A node with If causal loops occur, Rule 1 is utilized ( The DCD in CSs-1: CSs-f: CSs-f of a node Furthermore, during the computation, the following laws hold. (1) (2) (3) (4) During the online reasoning, if Suppose that And then normalization is performed Hence, However, in terms of A simple DCD in CSs-1: CSs-f: DCSs-f: Let Hence Subsequently normalization is performed If Dempster–Shafer Theory of Evidence is first proposed by A frame of discernment Θ is a set of mutually exclusive and exhaustive propositional hypotheses ( Given a set of bba DCD deals with uncertainties in a probabilistic way. It has been widely used in actual production where uncertainties exist. Coexistence of certainties and uncertainties is common in real production. In this study, the certain information is obtained online with high SNR. Conversely, the uncertain information is measured with low SNR, expressed through semantic descriptions, or evaluated subjectively. It indicates that the measurements of the certain variables are reliable, while those of the uncertain variables are unreliable. Uncertain variables may be achieved by various sources, such as inference by the father nodes, experts’ evaluation, rough measurements and so on. A single information source is not reliable enough. The traditional DCD has a problem of taking full use of all the information sources. It is necessary to fuse the valuable information sources to obtain a relatively reliable result. Besides, the traditional DCD has another problem of hard partition. It classifies every variable into multiple exclusive states by hard partition, hence useful information and precision during discretization procedure are lost. To solve the valuable information usage problem, DST is added into the traditional DCD. To reduce information loss during hard partition, Fuzzy membership is used for the certain variable states classification. Fuzzy DCD based on DST (FDbD) will be proposed in this section. In the traditional DCD, both certain and uncertain variables are discrete into several states through hard partition. Discretion of certain variables inevitably results in information loss. Hence, the traditional DCD cannot ensure precision or even makes wrong reasoning result. To reduce the information loss from hard partition, certain and uncertain variables are handled separately for further reasoning in this research. Obviously, the value/state of a certain variable is accurately known. Therefore, certain nodes are root nodes without any father nodes. Compared to the traditional DCD, the proposed FDbD adds certain root event variable to the DCD, lettered by A linkage event variable that represents The construction of DCD requires process knowledge, which can be obtained through experts’ experiences. Then offline parameter determination is focused on, where the parameter indicates Pr{  In this subsection, the online probabilities are determined.  Fuzzy membership function is a concept in Fuzzy theory that is put forward by Zadeh. Fuzzy membership In actual processes, limited to the drawback of measurement techniques and production circumstances, there are variables that cannot be precisely achieved. Such variables are called the uncertain variables. In this paper, DST is employed to estimate After This research mainly concentrates on two kinds of information sources. One is the measurement that is measured or estimated online. The other one is derived through the father nodes. It is to be noted that some uncertain event variables may have only one information source, and then DST is not necessary. The probability of Pr{ The FDbD based online reasoning starts from the root nodes, and ends at the leaf nodes. The probabilities are calculated hierarchically. The state of a node event variable can be deduced by its father nodes. Suppose that the father nodes are mutually independent. It indicates that the probabilities of the root nodes need to be computed at first. Subsequently, the probabilities of the node event variables whose father nodes’ states have been achieved are then computed through their father nodes. Similarly, the probabilities of the rest nodes are calculated. Procedures of online reasoning is summarized below. Compute the probabilities of each state of root variables. If the variable is certain, the probability is calculated as mentioned in Section Calculate the probabilities of the rest node event variables hierarchically from the root nodes to the leaf nodes. The node event variables are uncertain. The probability is separately calculated from each information source at first and then fused by DST as mentioned in Section When the probabilities of all the leaf event node variables’ are obtained, the algorithm stops. The simple example in After  When the proposed FDbD is explored in operating performance optimality assessment, it is assumed that the causal diagram covers all the possible steady operating performances and different performance grades have adequate difference Let The schematic diagram of POPOA grade determination is shown in The operating performance grade assessment can result in the following three cases. If the performance grade with the largest probability within the If the performance grade with the largest probability within the Otherwise, keep original performance grade assessment unchanged and go on assessing. The detailed flow chart is shown in When the process is operating at a non-optimal grade, cause identification needs to be done. Valid cause identification searches responsible variables for the non-optimality, therefore the operators can adjust production according to the identification guidance to bring the performance back to the optimal grade. Inspired by the variable contribution plot methods, the assessing index Due to the hierarchical structure of DCD, cause identification is performed backwardly from the leaf node to the root nodes. First of all, the responsible father nodes for the non-optimal assessing index Each state of a node event variable Let The probabilities of the father node events change according to their current states, whereas, the probabilities of the linkage events do not change online. When the process is operating at a non-optimal performance, the contribution of the responsible causes for the non-optimal state It is assumed that sufficient optimal data are collected. The probability density function (pdf) of contribution Versus If C A significance level To be more intuitive, the contribution index is redefined as If Compared to the pyrometallurgy, the gold hydrometallurgy is environmentally friendly and high efficient. The production of gold hydrometallurgy is a rather complex chemical process. It is difficult to establish the mechanism model. Besides, limited to the measurement techniques, the measurements of gold hydrometallurgy process contain considerable uncertainties. A typical gold hydrometallurgy process consists of the cyanide leaching, filter pressing, replacement, and refining sub-processes. The cyanide leaching sub-process transforms the solid gold in the ore into liquid gold cyanide complex ion in the pulp. The filter pressing sub-process performs solid-liquid separation. Then the majority of the gold is in the liquid pulp, which is called the pregnant solution, and the rest solid slag contains only tiny amounts of gold. The pregnant solution is then transported to the replacement sub-process, where the gold is replaced by the zinc, and then the gold slime is obtained. The gold slime contains the gold and impurities and further refining process is required to purify the gold slime to achieve the gold with high-purity. Operating performance of the cyanide leaching sub-process directly affects the leaching rate and leaching cost, which are important influencing factors of CEB. The filter pressing sub-process is closely related to the cyanide leaching sub-process. In this section, the cyanide leaching process and the filter pressing sub-process from a gold hydrometallurgy are to be assessed. The POPOA efficiency based on the traditional DCD and the proposed FDbD are compared. A large number of variables are present in the two sub-processes. CEB is taken as the final assessing index. There are two operating performance grades, i.e., the optimal grade and the non-optimal grade, corresponding to State 1 and 2 of CEB. The manipulated variables ought to be kept in the proper amount to make the operating performance optimal. The sampling time is 2.5 To illustrate the validity of the proposed assessing approach for processes under coexistence of certainties and uncertainties, three scenarios are designed, as briefly illustrated in In Case 1, 200 samples are assessed. The first 100 samples are operating at the optimal level. Since the 100th sample, the original throughput of the ore ( In Case 2, 200 samples are assessed. The first 99 samples are operating at the optimal level. Since the 100th sample, the original throughput of the ore ( In Case 3, 200 samples are assessed. The 200 samples are all operating at the optimal performance. Due to a lack of maintenance for a rather long time, the measurements of dissolved oxygen content ( This research addresses the operating performance optimality online assessment problem for chemical processes with coexistence of certainties and uncertainties. An essential problem of the traditional DCD, namely it cannot take advantage of both online measurable and reasoning information from the father nodes, is solved. FDbD is proposed to combine multi-source information of an uncertain node. Certain and uncertain variables are tackled separately to ensure the valuable information is preserved as much as possible. The corresponding online assessing strategy is developed, which distinguishes the stable performance grade and the grades switch transitions. The non-optimal cause identification technique is proposed based on novel events contributions. The proposed FDbD based online assessment and cause identification approach is successfully applied to a gold hydrometallurgy POPOA. Compared to the traditional DCD, FDbD has superiority in accuracy and robustness. The dependence on measurement techniques and production circumstance is largely reduced. Hopefully, the novel POPOA approach could be applied to more chemical processes. However, most causal relations based methods, like the Bayesian network and DCD, have causal loop problems. The DCD method deals with the causal loops, but there still may be some information loss. The further research would be carried out to improve this issue. This work was financially supported by the