Polymetallic Cu–Ag ores of the Central European Kupferschiefer deposits are one of the most important sources of copper in Europe. Because the ores are typically complex and often exceptionally fine-grained the development of efficient alternatives to conventional beneficiation strategies are an important target of current research. Biomining – the use of biological components for metal extraction – may offer solutions that are both efficient and environmentally benign. As conventional bioleaching with acidophilic microorganisms is impeded by the high carbonate content of the Kupferschiefer ores, heterotrophic microorganisms and glutamic acid are investigated as a possible alternative in the present study. The focus of this investigation is solely on the recovery of copper from the Kupferschiefer sensu strictu. Bioleaching experiments were carried out using such material from the Polkowice Mine in Poland. This material is marked by high grade (3.8wt.% Cu), complex ore mineralogy (chalcocite, bornite, chalcopyrite and covellite in significant quantity) and a gangue mineralogy that is rich in carbonate, organic carbon and clay minerals that together form a very fine-grained matrix. (Bio)leaching experiments yield best results when glutamic acid alone is used – reaching copper recoveries up to 44%. Recoveries are consistently lower in experiments in which glutamic acid and microbiological metabolites are both present. The leaching of chalcocite renders the greatest contribution to the copper recovered to the leach solution in all experiments. It can be concluded that glutamic acid solubilises copper efficiently from Kupferschiefer, mainly from chalcocite.The Central European Copperbelt hosts a wealth of polymetallic ores that not only comprise a world-class asset ( Bioleaching may provide such an alternative approach. Bioleaching is the solubilisation of solid metal compounds by microorganisms or their metabolites. Bioleaching of copper is applied commercially since 1950 starting with low grade ores ( The copper content of Kupferschiefer Because of the above, bioleaching at neutral and alkaline pH ranges seems a worthwhile alternative. Experiments aiming at solubilisation of copper from the organic compounds in Kupferschiefer by heterotrophic species showed poor copper recoveries up to 2.8% ( Experiments were performed to investigate the effects of bacilli and organic acids on the solubilisation of copper from Kupferschiefer. The leaching processes were followed by copper analysis of solution samples taken at timed intervals and by quantitative mineralogical analysis of feed material and solid leach residues. All chemicals and reagents used in the present study were of analytical grade. Ore samples of Kupferschiefer The strains Experiments were carried out using 500 Based on the weight of the aliquots of the milled Kupferschiefer batch volumes were calculated. Shaking speed was 110 Since application of conventional sterilising techniques based on an increase heat and pressure may result in changes of copper–sulphur phases ( Quantitative chemical data of the feed material, solid leach residues and pregnant liquor were acquired from all experiments by ICP-MS (Perkin Elmer ELAN 9000). Before measurement solid residues and leaching broth samples were separated by centrifugation. The leaching broth was acidified. Solid samples were digested with aqua regia in a microwave oven (MLS 1200 mega high performance microwave digestion unit, 100 Grain mounts of feed material and solid leach residues were prepared for quantitative mineralogical analysis using a MLA. For this purpose, aliquots of 3 The MLA system comprises a scanning electron microscope FEI Quanta 650F equipped with two Bruker Quantax X-Flash 5030 energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers and the specific software MLA Suite 3.1.4 for automated data acquisition. The MLA measurements were carried out at the Geometallurgy Laboratory at Technische Universität Bergakademie Freiberg. Consistent operating conditions were applied. These are listed in Because kerogen cannot be determined as a distinct solid phase in epoxy grain mounds, all mineralogical data reported in this study pertain to inorganic compounds. The effects of bacilli and organic acids on the solubilisation of copper from Kupferschiefer were investigated. Chemical and mineralogical analyses were performed to describe and understand the leaching process. ICP-MS analysis documents a copper content of 3.8 Copper concentration in the leaching broth ( Within the leaching period ( These results indicate that the main leaching activity can be assigned to the glutamic acid which is present in batches “medium”, “A12”, “B12” and “B5T” as a component of the growth medium. The development of the pH value in the leaching broth illustrates a similar grouping ( The increase of pH entails two issues. On the one hand this alkalinity might decrease the availability of medium components, which in turn influences metabolic activity of the bacteria. Thus, metabolic and potential leaching activity is likely to decrease. This point is strengthened by photomicrographs ( Average copper recoveries ( Comparable results were reported by All leach residues were analysed by MLA to detect mineralogical changes. As already indicated by negligible copper recovery there are no significant changes in mineralogy in samples treated with deionised water. Thus, data for these samples are not discussed in any detail. The feed sample contains significant quantities of four copper minerals, namely chalcocite, bornite, chalcopyrite and covellite. These four ore minerals show distinctly different behaviour during leaching experiments – with relative changes rather consistent between the different experimental batches. The feed material contains 3.5 The “medium” batch shows only slight variations in composition compared to the feed. There is almost no change in chalcocite content, a slight depletion in bornite and chalcopyrite and a formation of secondary covellite. The three batches A12, B12 and B5T display similar trends like the glutamic acid set up. Again, there is a slight decrease of chalcocite, bornite and chalcopyrite. Due to this, there is a small increase in covellite. However, the modal mineralogy indicates a smaller leaching effect in batches A12, B12 and B5T. The deportment of copper in the main copper ore minerals emphasises the trend of the modal mineralogical composition ( The “medium” batch displays only small changes in the copper distribution.  The combined plot illustrates the copper recovery achieved from each single copper mineral. For example, for bornite and chalcopyrite average recoveries of 36.9% and 39.8% are reported. But due to differences in the amount of these minerals in Kupferschiefer, bornite contributes more in copper recovery whereas the contribution by chalcopyrite is almost negligible. Both chalcopyrite and bornite are copper–iron–sulphur minerals so similar leaching behaviour is probable. Nevertheless, data acquisition especially in minor concentration ranges is prone to error. Thus, a critical assessment of the observations is highly appropriate. Chalcocite makes the most prominent contribution to copper recovery. Both copper variation and recovery have their maximum in the glutamic acid batch with 13.7 The results show that leaching of Kupferschiefer using glutamic acid is feasible. Batches containing microorganisms – indigenous species as well as incorporated ones – do not reach the copper recovery of glutamic acid only (43.6%). To improve copper recovery application of microorganisms producing glutamic acid is of great interest. Leaching finds expression in the mineralogy of the Kupferschiefer samples. During the experiment the contents of chalcocite, bornite and chalcopyrite are decreased whereas covellite and other copper minerals increase due to formation of secondary minerals. In consequence of its minor amount in Kupferschiefer chalcopyrite contributes only minor to metals recovery although data reveal good leaching rates. The most prominent part in copper recovery is contributed by chalcocite. To increase recovery it is expedient to focus on Kupferschiefer deposits rich in chalcocite. Since covellite is formed during leaching it is likely that it hinders a leaching. Data of glutamic acid batches and those inoculated with In general further investigation of the influence of acid concentration and dosage appears useful. This is preferably performed in directed batches in stirred tanks. These provide regulation of pH, dosage of acid as well as increased mixing of the solid. Mineralogical changes of the leaching residues of glutamic acid, growth medium without and with inoculation with