A method of determination of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni in nanogram quantities from aragonite is presented. Flotation and extraction of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni is suggested as methods for elimination matrix interferences of calcium. The method of flotation is performed by iron(III) hexamethylenedithiocarbamate, Fe(HMDTC)3, as a colloid precipitate collector. The liquid–liquid extraction of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni is carried out by sodium diethyldithiocarbamate, NaDDTC, as complexing reagent into methylisobutyl ketone, MIBK. The electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry (ETAAS) is used for determination of analytes. The detection limits of ETAAS followed by flotation are: 7.8 ng·g−1 for Co, 17.1 ng·g−1 for Cu, 7.2 ng·g−1 for Pb and 9.0 μg·g−1 for Ni. The detection limits of ETAAS followed by extraction are found to be: 12.0 ng·g−1 for Co, 51.0 ng·g−1 for Cu, 24.0 ng·g−1 for Pb and 21.0 ng·g−1 for Ni.Aragonite, CaCO Methods concerning determinations of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) in geological samples with calcium matrix can be found in the review given by Stafilov The purpose of this work is to present two separation methods for the elimination of calcium matrix interferences on the determination of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni traces in aragonite. Taking into account that dithiocarbamate ions have the ability to form extractable chelate complexes with numerous heavy metals, the extraction of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni diethyldithocarbamate chelates in methylisobutyl ketone prior their ETAAS determination is proposed. On the other hand, because the physical and chemical properties of aragonite aqueous solution are similar to those of the natural waters with higher water hardness, a method of flotation is applied as the second way to eliminate the calcium matrix effects. Flotation is a well known technique for selective a separation of valuable substances from ores and minerals, but today this technique is used mainly in other fields of chemical engineering and more rarely in analytical chemistry also Traces of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni were determined by ETAAS using Perkin-Elmer 1100 B spectrophotometer equipped with HGA-700 graphite furnace and deuterium background correction All reagents used were of analytical-reagent grade except for the surfactant sodium dodecyl sulfate (NaDDS). Deionized redistilled water was used throughout. By dissolving an appropriate amount of Co(NO Aragonite solution for flotation was prepared by dissolving 1 g of powdered sample of mineral with 20 ml of concentrated HCl and 5 ml of concentrated HNO A combined glass electrode is immersed into 1 l of aragonite solution. After adding 6 ml of saturated KNO The solution of aragonite (15 ml) was transferred into a separatory funnel. Then, 5 ml of 50% aqueous solution of ammonium citrate were added and the pH value is adjusted with a few drops of NaOH solution (20%) to 6.0. Then 5 ml of 0.2% aqueous solution of sodium diethyldithiocarbamate solution were added, the mixture was shaken for 1 min. After 15 min, 5 ml of MIBK were introduced and the mixture was shaken for 2 min. Co, Cu, Pb and Ni were determined by ETAAS in the organic layer. One of the major problems in ETAAS is matrix interferences. In the case of aragonite, it was necessary to check whether calcium as a matrix element would cause any interference on the absorbances of trace elements during ETAAS determination. For this purpose, series of solutions with constant concentrations of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni and different calcium concentrations were tested by ETAAS. The concentration of analytes in the solutions was similar to their concentrations in the sample solution of aragonite. The results showed that calcium present in higher concentration tended to decrease the absorbance of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni ( The extraction separation of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni as diethyldithiocarbamate complexes in MIBK from aqueous solution of aragonite was performed in the presence of ammonium citrate at pH 6.0, adjusting with NaOH. The organic phase: inorganic phase volume ratio was 1:5 Each flotation depends on pH and ionic strength ( To investigated influence of HMDTC The data presented in The flotation of waters with high hardness has been shown very difficult because the ions present in the system can react with the surfactant and suppress the flotation. Accordingly, it was necessary to find the most appropriate concentration of aragonite solution for flotation. Series of solutions (1 l) containing different aragonite amount (5.0, 4.0, 3.0, 2.0 and 1.0 g) were floated at pH 6.0 and The experiments showed that the presence of high concentrations of calcium ions had no significant influence on the formation of Fe(HMDTC) It was very useful to know what happened with calcium during the flotation, due to the fact that the solution of aragonite prepared as 1 g l To check whether calcium coextract with the investigated analytes, a series of solutions (15 ml) containing 40 mg calcium and 50 ng Co, Cu, Pb and Ni were extracted by the proposed procedure with NaDDTC in MIBK. After the extraction these elements were determined in the organic phase. The ETAAS showed that there were no interferences on Co, Cu, Pb and Ni absorbances. Also, an aliquot of organic layer was separated, evaporated to dryness and the residue dissolved in 2 ml of concentrated HCl. Using FAAS, it was found that extracted amounts of the calcium were in a range that had not any effect on the absorbance of the investigated elements. To determine the standard deviations of the flotation method, as well as of the extraction method, ten blanks were floated, i.e. extracted by the recommended procedures and then the concentration of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni were determined by ETAAS. The detection limit ( To 1 l aliquots of aqueous solutions, containing 1 g of aragonite, known amounts of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni were added. After flotation in accordance with the proposed procedure, ETAAS determination of these analytes was performed using a calibration curve and the method of standard additions. Both measurements (by the calibration curve and by standard additions) seem to be equally valid ( The methods were also checked by its application on dolomite (GBW 07114) and limestone (NIST 88 b) reference materials ( The present study has proved that liquid–liquid extraction, as well as colloid precipitate flotation can be used to overcome the problem with calcium matrix interferences on Co, Cu, Pb and Ni traces included in aragonite during their ETAAS analysis. The recommended extractive method applied MIBK as a very appropriate organic solvent for successful selective extraction of diethyldithiocarbamate complexes of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni from aragonite aqueous solution. The major advantage of this method is the fact that calcium can not be extracted under conditions recommended for other analytes investigated. The present paper is the first attempt to apply flotation as an analytical method for selective separation of metal traces from a natural mineral. Considering the similar physical and chemical properties of natural waters with higher water hardness and those of diluted aqueous solution of aragonite, colloid precipitate flotation, as a method suitable for analysis of trace elements from large volumes of water was selected as procedure. After incorporation of Co, Cu, Pb and Ni traces in the collector particles of Fe(HMDTC) The major advantages of these two separation methods are the rapidity of the procedures, the use of inexpensive devices and the possibility to obtain very low detection limits for all the investigated elements.