Background
                  Fractures in osteoporotic patients can be difficult to treat because of poor bone quality and inability to gain screw purchase. The purpose of this study is to compare modern lateral periarticular distal fibula locked plating to antiglide plating in the setting of an osteoporotic, unstable distal fibula fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  AO/OTA 44-B2 distal fibula fractures were created in sixteen paired fresh frozen cadaveric ankles and fixed with a lateral locking plate and an independent lag screw or an antiglide plate with a lag screw through the plate. The specimens underwent stiffness, cyclic loading, and load to failure testing. The energy absorbed until failure, torque to failure, construct stiffness, angle at failure, and energy at failure was recorded.
               
                  Results
                  The lateral locking construct had a higher torque to failure (p
                     =0.02) and construct stiffness (p
                     =0.04). The locking construct showed a trend toward increased angle at failure, but did not reach statistical significance (p
                     =0.07). Seven of the eight lateral locking plate specimens failed through the distal locking screws, while the antiglide plating construct failed with pullout of the distal screws and displacement of the fracture in six of the eight specimens.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In our study, the newly designed distal fibula periarticular locking plate with increased distal fixation is biomechanically stronger than a non-locking one third tubular plate applied in antiglide fashion for the treatment of AO/OTA 44-B2 osteoporotic distal fibula fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence: V
                  This is an ex-vivo study performed on cadavers and is not a study performed on live patients. Therefore, this is considered Level V evidence.An unstable ankle fracture has been shown to be an indication for open reduction and internal fixation in order to lower the risk of posttraumatic arthritis secondary to abnormal loading There have been a variety of implants described to treat distal fibula fractures, including lateral non-locking plates, lateral locking plates, and posterolateral antiglide plating. Lateral application of a plate on the distal fibula is typically in neutralization mode after the placement of a lag screw across the fracture site. On the posterolateral surface, the plate is applied directly over the proximal apex of the fracture, in antiglide fashion. Lag compression can be achieved by inserting a lag screw through the plate in a posterior-to-anterior direction. Given these options, it is important for the treating surgeon to consider methods of fixation that will maximize the stability of anatomic reduction while minimizing complications. Locked plating has been used in the treatment of metaphyseal fractures when there is a short distal end segment that limits the options for screw fixation, such as in the distal fibula. There is some evidence that the biomechanical effectiveness of lateral locking plate fixation is independent of bone mineral density (BMD) while non-locking lateral plate fixation is dependent on BMD Antiglide plating has long been associated with tendon irritation and high rates of hardware removal The purpose of this study was to evaluate an anatomically contoured distal fibular lateral locking plate that utilizes increased distal fixation and compare it to non-locked antiglide plating in unstable, osteoporotic distal fibula fractures. Prior to the study, we believed that there would be no difference in the construct stiffness, failure strength, and energy absorbed in the failure test between the lateral periarticular distal fibula locked plating to the antiglide plating. Eight paired (sixteen total) fresh frozen cadaveric ankle specimens were obtained from the mid-tibia to the foot and stored in a freezer at −20 Preparation of the specimens started with dissection of the proximal 5 All cadaveric surgery work was done by a senior level orthopaedic resident and the fractures were anatomically reduced and fixed in the following, standardized manner. For the antiglide plating group, a 5-hole one-third tubular plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA) was used. The plate was placed posterolaterally and secured with two 3.5 After appropriate fixation, the specimens were then loaded into a custom designed, multi-axial biomechanical apparatus which allowed a controlled rate of rotation and was able to measure angular displacement and torque with the use of a servomotor, reaction torque sensor, and motor encoder. The apparatus and subsequent protocol had previously been used in a similar biomechanical study at the same institution The tibia was secured into an aluminum cylinder using multiple rows of sharp tipped bolts The specimen testing was divided into four phases: pre-cyclic loading stiffness, cyclic loading, post-cyclic loading stiffness, and torque to failure. For the pre-cyclic loading stiffness testing, the 600 The data were then analyzed using custom programs in Matlab (Mathworks™, Natick, MA). The external rotation laxity and range of motion was determined as the joint position change at 5 For the specimens that failed during cyclical loading, the point of failure was determined by a sudden change in angular displacement for the 5 Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures was used to compare the laxity, range of motion and stiffness across the pre- and post-cyclic loading conditions and between the two methods of fixation. Paired student The BMD of the lateral locking plate specimens was not different from the BMD of the antiglide plate specimens (0.240 The stiffness of the specimens was determined based on pre-cyclic loading and post-cyclic loading testing. The pre-cyclic loading stiffness of the lateral locking plate was not different from the antiglide plate (0.26 When comparing all specimens, the energy absorbed for the lateral locking plate construct throughout the cyclic loading was significantly greater than the antiglide plating construct (29515 Of the sixteen specimens, six constructs failed prior to reaching the final stage of testing. Two specimens failed in the pre-cyclic loading stiffness testing (both antiglide plating constructs), four specimens failed during cyclic loading (two from each construct group), and the remaining ten specimens completed torque to failure testing. It should be noted that the two locking plate specimens that failed had their respective matched pairs also fail during cyclic loading in the antiglide plating group. These lateral locking plate constructs failed at a later point than their matched counterpart (330 vs. 2 cycles, 144 vs. 5 cycles). The early failures within the antiglide plating group implies that their torque to failure was around the torque limit set for cyclical loading which was 5 Lastly, all specimens were inspected for their modes of failure. The antiglide plating construct failed with pullout of the distal screws and displacement of the fracture in six of the eight specimens ( Fixation of distal fibula fractures in osteoporotic bone is a surgical challenge. Given the increasing elderly population, surgeons are more likely to confront osteoporotic ankle fractures. In the elderly, surgical intervention has been proven to be superior to conservative management in unstable ankle fractures Two common fixation constructs used for distal fibula fractures include antiglide plating and lateral plating. Antiglide plating was first described by Brunner and Weber in 1982 where they described proper application techniques and demonstrated how it avoids certain complications related to lateral plating There have been few studies comparing lateral locked or non-locked plating to antiglide plating. Most recently, Minihane et al. performed a cadaveric study and found the antiglide plate to be biomechanically superior to a one third tubular locking plate in osteoporotic bone Locked plating technology has been popularized by its ability to achieve increased fixation in osteoporotic bone While our results seem to agree with Zahn et al. Interestingly, a majority of the lateral locking plate constructs failed catastrophically around the distal locking screws. The fracture itself remained relatively nondisplaced with fragmentation of the distal segment. A potential disadvantage of the increased number of distal locking screws is weakening of the bone, and in the setting of preexisting weakened osteoporotic bone, creating more bony defects with the screw creates an area predisposed to fracture. With this in mind, we still found the amount of torque that led to this failure mode was higher than the amount of torque required to fail the antiglide plating constructs. This biomechanical study has some limitations. Our study utilized an osteotomy and ligament sectioning that has been used in other biomechanical studies Despite these findings, because we used paired specimens, we still were able to find a difference between the two constructs even in those specimens that failed early. Finally, we also do acknowledge that in the locking plate construct also utilized a lag screw in addition to the plate. We chose to do this allow both the locking and antiglide group to achieve perpendicular compression of the osteotomy, with the antiglide group doing so through the plate itself and the locking group with an independent screw. Because the lag screw in the locking group was in an independent plane as the plate and locking screws, it may have added to the stiffness of the locking construct in its entirety. Although, we did not see any failures in the locking plate group at the level of the lag screw, but instead all failures were at the distal screw cluster. This suggests to us that intrinsic stiffness of the locking plate construct itself was likely not great affected by the addition of the lag screw. In conclusion, this study demonstrates the lateral periarticular distal fibula locking plate to be superior to a one third tubular antiglide plate in torsional and external rotational loading in an osteoporotic, cadaveric model. Anatomically contoured distal fibula locking plates with increased points of fixation in the distal segment may provide surgeons with a stronger alternative in the setting of unstable, osteoporotic distal fibula fractures. Dr. Merk discloses he is a consultant for Stryker, receives research support from Stryker and Synthes, and is on the Editorial Board for All authors were fully involved in the study and preparation of the manuscript. This material has not been accepted submitted for publication elsewhere. The authors would like the thank Mahesh Polavarapu, BS, and Xin Guo, MS, for their assistance in the biomechanical aspects of this project. Stryker (Mahwah, NJ) provided a grant for cadaveric specimens and implants.