The influence of heating rates and interrupted aging treatments on α precipitation in the β-quenched Ti-6Cr-5Mo-5V-4Al alloy has been investigated. Microstructure observations reveal that slow heating rates and low temperature pre-aging produce much refined and uniform distributions of intragranular α precipitates in comparison to aging using fast heating rates at a high temperature only. For interrupted aging treatments, the nucleation rate and refinement of α are gradually enhanced with increasing pre-aging time, but this is dependent on the final aging temperature: at high final aging temperatures, the distribution of α precipitates is similar to single aging at the same temperature. The kinetics of phase transformation was analyzed by thermal mechanical analysis (TMA) under the framework of the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) theory. Coupled with microstructural observations, it is suggested that epitaxial growth of pre-existing α phase formed during heating to the aging temperature is the governing mechanism under slow heating rate conditions, while for interrupted aging treatments, the mechanism for intergranular α precipitation is consistent with that of fast heating rate single temperature aging treatments. For interrupted aging, the formation of uniform and refined α precipitates essentially relies on activation of homogeneous precursors associated with chemical partitioning and structural modulation which provide a strong driving force for nucleation of α.Metastable β titanium alloys are being increasingly utilized in applications as high performance structural materials in the aircraft and automotive industries, due to their high strength-to-weight ratios, lower processing temperature than α + β alloys, deep age hardenability and advantageous balance of mechanical properties It has been recognized that slow rates of heating to the aging temperature and low-temperature-high-temperature interrupted aging treatments are effective to obtain fine and uniform distributions of α In the similar Ti-5Al-5Mo-5V-3Cr-1Zr (Ti-55,531) alloy, under the same slow heating rate to the isothermal aging temperatures (~400–550 °C), the isothermal ω phase was found to transform into an isothermal martensitic α″ phase, eventually forming a homogeneous distribution of fine α plates from the isothermal α″ to α transformation Cylinders of the Ti-6554 alloy with ϕ10 mm × 100 mm size were provided by the Baoti Group, China. Solution treatment was conducted in a muffle furnace in air. The samples were solution treated at 830 °C (above the β transus of ~760 °C) for 1 h by placing them directly into the preheated furnace, followed by air cooling (AC). The solution treated samples were then subjected to single step aging or interrupted aging. Single step aging treatments at a controlled heating rate of 5 °C/min and ~100 °C/min was carried out at 500 °C for 5 h. Interrupted aging heat treatments involved initial aging at 300 °C for up to 120 h with a selection of samples rapidly quenched to room temperature and further aged at 500 °C (~100 °C/min heating rate) for different durations. The heat treatment conditions are summarized in TMA was used for in-situ detection of the aging response. Cylindrical samples (ϕ3 mm × 6 mm) were cut from selected samples by EDM wire cutting and mechanically ground to remove oxides from the surface. The linear thermal expansion was recorded by TMA conducted under the protection of an Ar atmosphere. The samples were directly loaded into the TMA apparatus and heated to the aging temperatures at heating rate of 5 °C/min or 100 °C/min. After reaching the aging temperature, the dimensional changes were continuously monitored while the sample was held at the isothermal aging temperature. The phase transformation was considered complete when the dimensions of the samples stabilized. It is assumed that the volume fraction of α precipitates formed after an aging time The influence of phase transformation kinetics on α precipitation can be assessed from the TMA data within the framework of the Avrami theory by means of the Johnson–Mehl–Avrami (JMA) equation From a logarithmic plot of the TMA data, In order to investigate the transformation from isothermal ω to α, the samples were initially aged at 300 °C for 24 h to form isothermal ω and then cut into disk samples with ϕ10 mm × 2 mm size. The disk samples were then aged at 500 °C for 60 s and 900 s to observe the evolution of isothermal ω at higher temperature. After the completion of aging treatments, the samples were water quenched. The age hardening response was characterized by hardness testing of ϕ10 mm × 10 mm samples aged for different durations. The Vickers hardness was measured with a 300 gf load and a diamond indenter. Before hardness testing, the surfaces of the samples were severely ground by at least 2 mm to remove the oxide on the surface and any oxygen contamination in the material. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was used to analyze the phase constitution of the alloy with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 nm). The microstructures of both the solution treated samples and the aged samples were observed by optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Samples prepared for OM and SEM were wet ground with water-proof SiC papers to 4000 grit, buff polished and etched by Kroll's solution (2 ml HF + +5 ml HNO  Previous investigations have revealed that the heating rate has a substantial impact on the aging response of the Ti-6554 alloy, and slower heating rates result in formation of finer, more even distributions of α precipitates Typical SEM images showing the morphology of intragranular and grain boundary α precipitates are provided in The microstructural observations indicate that the heating rate greatly influences the formation of intragranular α, α  BF-TEM images in The dark-field (DF) TEM image taken from the reflection of ω phase is presented in As shown in  Higher magnification SEM images of the intragranular structure from the same samples are shown in The dependences of linear expansion and degree of transformation on aging time for interrupted aging treatments are shown in The plots of ln(ln(1/(1 − The influence of the final aging temperature on α precipitation for the interrupted aging treatments has also been investigated. The microstructural observations reveal that the heating rate to a single aging temperature, and also the pre-aging time and final aging temperature employed for interrupted aging treatments greatly influence the formation of intragranular α, α To investigate the influence of isothermal ω on the subsequent high temperature aging response samples were isothermally held at 300 °C for 24 h to cause isothermal ω to form and rapidly heated to 500 °C and held for 60 s and 900 s, followed by water quenching. The microstructure from the sample held for 60 s is shown in  The phase transformation from isothermal ω to α can be interpreted as follows. When heated to the higher aging temperature, the isothermal ω phase becomes thermodynamically unstable and reverts to the β phase. Formation of strong, highly localized compositional partitioning and a high density of dislocations provide potent sites for nucleation of α resulting in formation of a high number density of fine α precipitates. Therefore, the precipitation of α phase follows the Route BC (as indicated in We now discuss the possible mechanisms influencing phase transformation kinetics in the formation of refined and uniform α precipitates. As illustrated in Regarding the formation of α As described in The phase transformation mechanism for formation of uniform and refined α precipitates by modulation of phase transformation kinetics has not been well understood. In the present paper, the influences of heating rate and interrupted aging treatment as a function of pre-aging time on the subsequent α precipitation in the relatively high β phase stability Ti-6Cr-5Mo-5V-4Al alloy have been systematically studied by OM, SEM, TEM and TMA. The following conclusions can be drawn from the investigation: The microstructure of the β-quenched alloy showed parallel striations and diffuse scattering consistent with the presence of incommensurate embryonic ω assisted by spinodal decomposition. When aged at a low temperature of 300 °C, the spinodal decomposition and structural modulation was strengthened and commensurate isothermal ω formed after prolonged aging time (>24 h). For single step aging treatments, slow heating rates decrease formation of α For interrupted aging treatments, pre-aging improved the age-hardening response, increased the peak hardness and decreased the formation of α For interrupted aging treatments, the final scale of α precipitates is dependent on the final aging temperature due to a competition between the time for α to start to form and weakening of the chemical partitioning, For interrupted aging treatments, the isothermal ω formed during low temperature pre-aging dissolves into the β matrix before precipitation of α. Isothermal ω phase plays an indirect role in formation of superfine α precipitates through provision of strong chemical partitioning. The present results suggest that formation of uniform and refined α precipitates by varying phase transformation kinetics, The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors greatly appreciate to the financial support by the Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 