Determining the rate at which Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) sulfide oxidation occurs in mining waste products is a central requirement for safe and sustainable long term design of storages, including tails storage facilities, ore stockpiles and waste rock dumps. Inappropriate design can result in AMD acidification, mobilisation of heavy metals and pollution of ground and surface waters. The use of soil gas (oxygen) transport modelling to model AMD based sulfide oxidation and potential acidity loads is widespread, but diffusion coefficients used for modelling are based on existing diffusion coefficient models derived for natural and agricultural soils. Mining wastes are often well sorted due to mineral processing, and differences in soil structure and porosity can impact on diffusion coefficient behaviour compared to natural soils. This study compares a variety of approaches to estimate the diffusion coefficient and compare these results to measured values for comparison and analysis. A diffusion column apparatus is used to compare diffusion coefficient models from the literature with test results from the laboratory in several mining derived AMD materials. The results of the comparison indicate that laboratory testing of diffusion provides more accurate estimation of soil gas diffusion coefficients in mine materials. The use of diffusion coefficient safety factor approaches are explored as possible alternatives, if measurement of mine material matrix soil gas diffusion coefficient is not possible.Geochemical engineering is required to ensure the ongoing chemical stability of mine waste products, such as process tailings, stock piled ore materials and waste rock. The production of acid mine or acid rock drainage (AMD) and associated acidity is caused by oxidation of sulfides contained within mine wastes and ores ( Reducing oxygen diffusion rates into mining wastes is a key geochemical engineering strategy to reduce acidity production ( Many mine waste facility designers apply rules of thumb and literature values for soil gas transport variables, such as diffusion and advection (e.g. Sandy–silty agricultural soils have been studied extensively for soil gas diffusion (   One of the key physical characteristics of mining tailings waste is the milling of the waste to produce optimal particle sizes for mineral/metallurgical processing plant circuits ( This study compares a variety of approaches to estimate and model the diffusion coefficient, to laboratory measured values of soil gas diffusion for comparison and analysis. A series of accepted diffusion coefficient estimation models available in the literature are applied to several AMD reactive soils and compared to laboratory measured values for the same AMD soil. The potential for negative impacts on geochemical design of mine waste facilities based on modelling using these literature based diffusion coefficients and models is then examined. The following methods were undertaken to achieve the above objectives: Two sets of natural sandy-silt AMD soil samples were selected for study based on their grain size and high reactivity due to sulphide content. These two AMD soils were physically compared to four different mine derived tails and to several natural soils to characterise potential differences in soil gas transport behaviour. The two sandy silt soils sourced from mine exploration sites, SS and SC, and a non-reactive silty sand control material, SSS, were used for diffusion column testing. The target soils (SS, SC) were sieved for particle size analysis and to assign soil types to help understand the physical characteristic and structure of the soil matrix, for the purposes of conceptualising soil gas transport, and analysing diffusion behaviour. The non-reactive silty sand control (SSS) was prepared with quartz washed river sand, sieved into the required particle size groups and then mixed by percentage to simulate similar soil to the AMD mine soils. The non-reactive soil was then subject to diffusion testing to confirm the AMD reaction was not affecting the diffusion results in the time period of the diffusion column tests. To provide data for the literature based diffusion coefficient estimation models, the three test soils required additional soil laboratory data to be collected, the most complex of which was the soil water characteristic curve (SWCC) response using the method of A literature review was undertaken to determine commonly used soil gas diffusion coefficient estimation functions. Historical significance of the estimation functions was also considered a criterion for inclusion. All diffusion coefficient The two test AMD soils, SS and SC, were tested to determine the diffusion coefficient D For each soil tested at a set moisture content, the diffusion chamber was purged with industrial Nitrogen (99.9% N Two sets of quality control tests were performed to evaluate the accuracy of the diffusion column apparatus, i) a test for Do (see below) and ii) a chamber leakage test (see After Test 1 the inlet valve was tightened, and Tests 2, 3, 4 yielded extremely stable and reproducible diffusion results in the chamber ( There are very few D The particle size distributions (PSD) for the target soils (SC, SS, see Lines for the No. 4 (4.76 mm) and No. 200 (0.074 mm) sieves are shown for soil classification purposes ( Tails 1–4 are all derived from copper processing activities from undisclosed mine sites and are similarly graded to the natural soils, apart from the tendency for the tails to have little material above 0.5 mm in size. The gold float process tails, also from an undisclosed mine site, were examples of a more processed material, well sorted and dominated by material from 0.01 to 0.1 mm in size. The target SS and SC materials were well sorted, dominated by material from 0.1 to 0.3 mm in size, a lower clay silt component than the natural soils and most of the tailings material. The soil results were then classified using the Unified Soil Classification System ( The three natural soils included show the upper and lower grain size variation expected in natural soils, from the middle range Lateritic soil –a well graded sand soil, silt loam soil - poorly graded silt soil (low coefficient of curvature) and river clay sand -poorly graded sand soil (high coefficient of curvature). The SC, SS, Gold float process tails, and Tails 4 are have very low Hazen coefficient of uniformity as expected <5, while natural soils are far more uniform with Hazen coefficients of up to128. The soil water characteristic curves for the AMD mine materials tested in the study (SS and SC) are shown in When inspecting the PSD and SWCC in Diffusion testing was undertaken using the diffusion column apparatus on the target AMD soils, SS and SC. Two sample depths were used for testing the materials in the diffusion column, 15 mm and 60 mm, and moisture contents were varied at 4% intervals to examine effective porosity effects on the measured diffusion coefficient. The diffusion test column results for the SS and SC soils are shown in The diffusion coefficient for each soil was then determined using Examining the diffusion behaviour of the two mine tails in The diffusion coefficient D The measured diffusion results for the SS, SC materials were then compared to the predicted values from the literature based on the diffusion coefficient models presented in  Comparison with other diffusion function models shows that the closest fit for D Model error is used to identify the best candidate models for accurately assessing the diffusion coefficient in the target tails-like AMD materials. The assessment of model error is undertaken using the following statistical measures selected for determining goodness of fit, noting that underestimation of diffusion coefficient is of some environmental concern in the mining sector, due to possible underestimation of acidity generated from oxidation of AMD mine materials. Error models used in this study include; mean difference (MD), root mean square error (RMSE), geometric mean error ratio (GMER), R GMER, MD and to some extent observed versus predicted gradient is particularly useful for unsaturated AMD soil properties as it helps to assess whether a function under or over estimates the particular diffusion function being examined, an important assessment for mining applications. The relationships between observed and predicted for the diffusion functions used in the study are shown in After processing the observed versus predicted data results for all of the error assessment functions (6)–(9) the results of the statistical error assessment has been summarised in From The SS material error assessment in Why the literature diffusion functions are not performing well at predicting diffusion coefficient in the target AMD mine materials is the central question of this study. Most soil gas diffusion studies ( The shape of the unsaturated response curves in and At the extremes of soil moisture, approaching θ Testing of the economic diffusion column design shows that minimal leakage does occur. Soil sample drying tendency was also identified during diffusion column testing as also potentially problematic. Soil structural change due to AMD related geochemical effects can most likely also be eliminated as a potential error source due to the fast nature of the diffusion column test. All diffusion column test data were collected within 24 h which is not enough time for AMD oxidation to influence soil structure –something which may be potential error for longer period humidity cell geochemical tests which may run over months. The key strength of the diffusion test is the ability for the test to be conducted within a few hours. Most of the literature diffusion coefficient estimation functions tested (see The measured diffusion was likely taking place in the effective and total porosity and this was illustrated by extending the diffusion testing beyond the SWCC predicted saturated moisture point. The SWCC technique is focused on water transport, while diffusion techniques are based on gas transport, effective porosity is generally a fluid flow concept that may not apply directly to gas flow, and several other forms of porosity have been suggested such as macroporosity and mesoporosity ( The sorted mine materials SS and SC, do not have the same range of fine pore radius displayed by the natural agricultural lateritic soil. This is believed to be pivotal to soil gas transport parameters such as effective porosity and residual and saturated moisture levels. The various diffusion coefficient functions are based on Fick's law, and so therefore are reliant on a the existence of a concentration gradient boundary condition to be effective, but it has been shown that diffusion coefficient changes relative to the relative concentrations of the diffusing materials. If soil gas diffusion coefficients are underestimated through the use of an insufficiently conservative natural or agricultural soil diffusion coefficient model, then AMD geochemical modelling undertaken to predict sulfide oxidation, will underestimate the rate of generation of acidity in the mine wastes. This is a serious problem that will potentially lead to insufficient treatment of AMD mine wastes, such as use of too little neutralising material, or reduced depth of final encapsulation of mining waste, and other relevant waste dump design dimensions, including depth of liners and capping systems. The high cost of sorting, mixing, treatment, encapsulation and capping of Megatonnes of AMD mine waste materials, is substantially increased if the geochemical design for the treatment and containment systems fail, and waste dumps require being rebuilt due to elevated sulfide oxidation rates ( Each tested mine material was best represented by differing diffusion functions, and even the best of the literature diffusion functions showed areas of under prediction of the measured D Measuring soil gas diffusion is an effective, inexpensive and accurate means to determine transport parameters relevant to the production of AMD in mine materials such as tailing and waste rock. A diffusion chamber with O The existing diffusion coefficient models from the literature were developed for natural soils that are well distributed, or may have higher levels of fines (clays and silts) and therefore smaller pore radii that respond to soil moisture changes with more impact on effective porosity of the material. The resulting higher matric potential of these soils means moisture would be likely to be distributed further through the soil structure, resulting in a broader range of diffusion coefficient values than those found in the mine materials, particularly near saturation. None of the diffusion coefficient models evaluated with mine materials were considered accurate for the full range of soil moisture conditions that could be expected in the field, particularly during mine closure when tails storages may start to dry out, or as water evaporates from the structures, or when approaching saturation, such as underneath designed oxygen limited earth covers. All of the models also under predicted diffusion coefficient as the soils approached saturation. This is of some concern for soil gas transport model use with AMD soils to predict acidity production, as AMD will be consistently under predicted. This means that soil cover designs for waste rock and tails storage facilities may not be sufficiently accurate to prevent oxidation of sulfide materials. Given the poor representation of diffusion coefficient models that appear to be useful for mine materials, using soil gas diffusion apparatus, such as the very economical diffusion column design presented, would appear to be a requirement of successfully predicting the geochemical behaviour of AMD soils. It is recommended that rather than relying on modelled estimates of D Much of the research in this paper builds off the published and unpublished ideas and approaches in the management of acid and metalliferous drainage that have been developed by Earth Systems, and particularly Dr Jeff Taylor, over the last two decades. I would like to acknowledge this pioneering work and the ongoing support that has been provided by Earth Systems and some of its past and present senior staff. I would also like to acknowledge the support of an The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at