Twenty different organic micropollutants (for example C1–C8 homologous alcohols and some phenols) in aqueous solution were subjected to vacuum-UV-oxidation (H2O-VUV) within a xenon-excimer flow-through photoreactor. The incoherent xenon-excimer lamp used exhibited an emission maximum at 172 nm. At this wavelength water is efficiently photolyzed with formation of hydrogen atoms and of highly oxidative hydroxyl radicals. The short lived hydroxyl radicals initiate a series of complex interrelated radical reactions that lead finally to the mineralization of the organic material dissolved in water. The efficiency of the total organic carbon (TOC) diminution is dependent on the nature of the organic substrate treated. For example, in the series of homologous alcohols the substrate methanol is mineralized faster than 1-octanol by a factor of 2.7 under identical conditions of VUV treatment and with similar initial TOC content of the water ranging between 40 and 50 ppm.The development status of light-induced Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) for water and waste water treatment has gained industrial scales for the UV-oxidation of organic matter in the presence of oxidants like hydrogen peroxide and/or ozone (H The basic concept behind this technology By contrast, the vacuum-UV photolysis of water (H The special requirements of the VUV photolysis of water according to The absorption of the VUV radiation by water usually dominates over the VUV absorption of dissolved organic micropollutants in the typical concentration range investigated ( Thus, the VUV irradiation of contaminated water provides a simple technique for the oxidation and mineralization of water contaminants without the addition of supplementary oxidants. For example, this may be of relevance for the production of ultra pure water or for the pretreatment of samples in the voltammetric analysis of heavy metals in order to eliminate organic matrix effects ( Therefore, a series of homologous alcohols and of some other compounds of environmental relevance ( The VUV-induced mineralization of each compound listed in In this context it is of interest that the degradation of methanol in VUV irradiated aqueous solutions was proposed recently as a new chemical actinometer ( The experimental setup of the xenon-excimer flow-through photoreactor was already published  The TOC degradation of different solutions of ethanol was used as a standard reaction to establish the reproducibility of the experiments by performing seven independent measurements. Furthermore, the mineralization of EtOH was selected to check the stability of the VUV emission of the Xe  The light-induced oxidative degradation of organic compounds in homogeneous aqueous solution is mainly driven by a complex series of radical reactions that are initiated by the hydroxyl radical. For example, the hydroxyl radical-induced destruction of ethanol proceeds via acetaldehyde and acetic acid. This sequence of radical reactions requires approximately 40 distinct reactions ( It is evident from Obviously, formic acid, acetic acid and 4-chlorophenol were mineralized most efficiently. 2-PrOH and 2-HexOH are faster mineralized than their primary homologues because a secondary carbon radical usually is easier produced by hydrogen abstraction via initial hydroxyl radical attack than a primary one. Likewise, acetone (C The homologous series of saturated alcohols C Thus, the VUV-oxidation of micropollutants with xenon-excimer lamps generally follows the scheme outlined in VUV-induced oxidation of organic micropollutants (C The authors acknowledge the support by Heraeus Noblelight Ltd. (Kleinostheim, Germany) and they are grateful to Mrs. E. Rothe for her experimental assistance.