Particle–particle separation in biotechnology has gained interest over the years due to the large number of processes that yield particle mixtures. Direct isolation of the product-containing particles is a logical and efficient downstream processing route in these processes. Dissolved-air flotation is applicable for these separations when the particles that require separation have different interactions with the air bubbles and/or differ in aggregation behaviour.
                  In this work, model particles consisting of micrometer-sized protein-coated polystyrene particles were used to investigate the requirements for the application of dissolved-air flotation for particle–particle separation in biotechnology. These model particles have heterogeneous surfaces with surface groups (brushes) that extend out into the solution. Therefore, steric (or brush) repulsion and so-called hydrophobic interactions between the particles need to be taken into account. The flotation behaviour of the protein-coated particles was related to the size of the aggregates and the foaming behaviour of the proteins. Prediction of their aggregation behaviour was performed on the basis of calculations of the Van der Waals, electrostatic, hydrophobic and brush interactions. The brush interaction force proves to be essential for the prediction of the aggregation behaviour of the particles.area occupied per brush (m Hamaker constant for the interaction between phase 1 and 2 across phase 3 (J) ionic concentration of the solution (mol/m particle diameter (m) elementary charge (C) shear rate (s energy of hydration (J/m separation distance (m) brush height (m) Boltzmann constant (J/K) aggregation rate constant for homoaggregation between two particles of type rate constant for heteroaggregation of particle type effective flotation rate constant of particle type effective aggregation rate (1/s) similar constant as the Hamaker constant for hydrophobic effects decay length (m) Avogadro number (mol concentration of particle type time (s) temperature (K) total interaction energy (J) as function of the separation distance stability ratio ion valency dielectric permittivity of the fluid (F/m) liquid viscosity (Pa Debye decay length (m) grafting density of the brushes zeta-potential (V) Biotechnological production processes often yield particulate products, such as protein inclusion bodies and crystals. Most of these particles contain the desired product at purities close to 100%, which makes particle–liquid separation a good candidate for particle recovery provided that no other particles are present. However, in many bioprocesses the suspension of the particulate product contains other, often similarly sized particles, such as microbial cells, cell debris or particulate by-products. This makes product recovery more complex because the target particles need to be separated from both the liquid phase and the undesired particles. Centrifugation and filtration are inefficient for product recovery from these suspensions due to the small size and overlapping size distributions of the particles. Dissolved-air flotation, a process that is applied for removal of small particles in wastewater treatment The flotation efficiency of sub-micrometer particles is very low as the result of their low momentum compared to the hydrodynamic interactions with air bubbles. In general, this efficiency increases with an increase in particle size. Particle aggregation can be used to increase the effective particle size and thus the flotation efficiency. Particle–particle separation using air flotation therefore depends strongly on the aggregation behaviour of the sub-micrometer particles and the interactions of the resulting aggregates with the air–water interface. In a previous study, we have shown that dissolved-air flotation can be applied successfully for the selective recovery of polyhydroxyalkanoate inclusion bodies from enzyme-treated fermentation broth, a suspension that contains inclusion bodies and cell debris particles In many cases the interaction between rough and/or heterogeneous surfaces cannot be described with the DLVO theory, which takes into account the Van der Waals and electrostatic interactions (see Pazhianur and Yoon The design of a selective flotation process for separation of sub-micrometer bioparticles requires proper description of the aggregation behaviour of these particles, which is likely to depend on DLVO forces as well as the above-mentioned additional repulsive and attractive forces. In this work, we attempt to describe the mechanism behind (selective) aggregation and the resulting (selective) flotation for the separation of sub-micrometer bioparticle mixtures by making use of several model systems that consist of different protein-coated polystyrene particles. The proteins BSA, lysozyme and casein were selected on the basis of the availability of literature data on their size, electrostatic properties, hydrophobicity and foaming behaviour ( The performance of a flotation process can be expressed by a flotation rate constant that is defined as the first order rate constant, The aggregation rate of a particle suspension depends on particle concentration and particle–particle interactions that are described in the next section. Eq. The aggregation rate constant depends on Brownian motion (perikinetic aggregation), hydrodynamics (orthokinetic aggregation) and the interaction forces between the particles. In this work, we will deal with orthokinetic aggregation only because stirred systems are used in which the shear energy is more than one order of magnitude larger than thermal energy, which implies that orthokinetic aggregation dominates Exact calculation of the orthokinetic stability ratio requires particle trajectory analysis taking into account the influences of the primary minimum and secondary minimum in the energy–distance curve for particle–particle interaction. Nevertheless, the total energy barrier between the particles can serve as a rough measure for the stability of the suspension. We therefore, approximate the orthokinetic stability ratio from the ratio between the total energy barrier between the particles and the shear energy in a similar manner as has been done by Fuchs The interactions between particles and between particles and air bubbles are fairly similar. In this work, we deal with the most important interaction forces in flotation and particle aggregation, which are Van der Waals interaction ( Eq. Rabinovich and Yoon Brush repulsion may play an important role in particle aggregation, especially when dealing with bioparticles that have rough surfaces. The interaction force between protein-coated particles is therefore expected to deviate from the DLVO theory due to this repulsive interaction between parts of the protein molecules that protrude into the solvent (brushes). Israëls et al. Pashley The non-DLVO forces that are presented in this section are still under investigation and the underlying mechanisms are not fully understood yet. Their importance for proper description of flotation and aggregation of bioparticles with rough and heterogeneous surfaces is therefore evaluated. Particle–bubble interactions are not likely to be affected by brush repulsion, but the surface chemistry of the particles may have a pronounced effect on the capture efficiency. The brushes may form bridges between the particles and bubbles, which will enhance the capture efficiency. The rigidity, specific orientation and thermal fluctuations of surface groups on the particles may prevent the particles from adsorbing at the air–water interface or can enhance the capture efficiency. These phenomena are very complex and require knowledge of their timescales relative to the particle–bubble collision process. We will therefore, focus on the interaction forces that have been discussed up to this point. The coupling procedure consists of three steps. First the polystyrene particles are coated with glutaraldehyde, then protein is added which reacts with glutaraldehyde, and finally unreacted glutaraldehyde is blocked by the addition of ethanolamine. Amino polystyrene particles with an average diameter of 0.987 Throughout this work, these particles are referred to as (covalently) protein-coated particles. Protein can passively adsorb onto polystyrene particles due to hydrophobic interaction between the particle surface and the hydrophobic parts of the protein molecules. Sulphate polystyrene particles with and without fluorescent dye (rhodamine) were obtained from the Department of Chemical Engineering of the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki (Greece). These particles had an average diameter of 0.88 and 1.0 The non-covalently protein-coated fluorescent sulphate polystyrene particles are only used in the separation experiment. In all other experiments the covalently protein-coated particles from the previous section were applied. Particle suspensions were washed three times in MilliQ water after which they were diluted in 0.01 Contact angle measurements were performed with the sessile drop technique on particle films using a direct reading contact angle goniometer (Krüss). The particle films were prepared by drying particle suspensions in small Petri dishes in an oven at 60 Besides contact angle measurements, wetting of dried particles by both liquids was investigated by depositing the particles onto the air–liquid interface. Through this procedure it was possible to determine whether or not the particles were wetted by the liquid phase and the rate with which the wetting occurs. Particle aggregation was studied in 1 Aggregate size was determined with image analysis. For this purpose microscopic images were taken with an Olympus IMT2 optical microscope at 150 times magnification. Leica Q win V 2.5 Q win pro image analysis software was used for image analysis. For every analysis at least five micrographs were analysed. Quantification of the fluorescent and non-fluorescent particles in particle mixtures requires two microscopic images to be taken at exactly the same location on a microscope slide. Samples containing fluorescent sulphate polystyrene particles with a passively adsorbed BSA coating and covalently casein-coated particles were therefore deposited onto microscope slides and dried at room temperature. Sets of microscopic images at 400 times magnification were taken at the same location in these samples with and without excitation of the fluorescent dye. Leica Q win V 2.5 Q win pro image analysis software was then used to analyse the area of fluorescent and non-fluorescent particles. For every analysis at least five micrographs were analysed. The relation between aggregate size and flotation behaviour was studied with batch flotation experiments that were performed in a cylindrical flotation device (height: 26 Suspensions of covalently casein-coated particles and fluorescent particles with a passively adsorbed BSA coating were suspended in phosphate buffer of the desired pH and ionic strength. The two suspensions were mixed immediately after setting the pH of the casein-coated particle suspension. The binary particle mixture was stirred for approximately 1 The values of the measured zeta-potentials for the covalently protein-coated particles and the unmodified particles are depicted in Fowkes The air–water contact angle was used to estimate the contribution of hydrophobic effects (  The wetting behaviour of BSA-coated and lysozyme-coated particles was similar and both particle types penetrated the air–water interface during the wetting experiment. For casein-coated particles wetting was much slower than for the other two protein-coated particles. Therefore, these particles remained on top of the interface during the wetting experiment. This implies that the casein-coated particles are more hydrophobic than the other protein-coated particles, which is in line with the measured contact angles and the hydrophobicity ranking of the proteins ( We will refrain from correcting the measured contact angles for surface roughness. In the rest of this work we make use of the measured contact angles. For casein-coated particles we do, however, assume a higher contact angle of 60° for reasons that were discussed above.  Some comments have to be made with respect to the results that are presented in Under the conditions that were applied during flotation (0.2 The flotation behaviour of the protein-coated particles is similar to the foaming behaviour of the protein molecules in solution ( Sub-micrometer particles have a low flotation efficiency, which makes their aggregation behaviour important for the design of an efficient flotation process. In this section the aggregation behaviour at high and low ionic strengths is explained on the basis of the interaction forces that were presented in the theory section. In The observed difference in aggregation behaviour for the unmodified polystyrene particles with amino and sulphate surface groups cannot be explained on the basis of their differences in hydrophobicity, Van der Waals interaction and electrostatic interaction because the calculated values of The aggregation behaviour of the protein-coated particles is in qualitative agreement with the magnitude Van der Waals interaction (  The aggregation rate of BSA-coated particles and lysozyme-coated particles in their iso-electric points (50 Casein-coated particle suspensions were stable at pH 6 and 7.9 in 50 The effective aggregation rate can be calculated from the aggregation rate under conditions without an energy barrier between the particles by correcting this rate for the stability ratio that accounts for the particle–particle interactions (see Eq. Separation of sub-micrometer particles from particle mixtures with flotation requires aggregation of the target particles in order to increase their flotation efficiency. A second requirement is that these aggregates have sufficient “affinity” for the air–water interface. For the particles that were investigated in this work we can observe a number of limitations to these requirements. First of all, BSA-coated particles do not aggregate very well even though their interactions with air bubbles are favourable for flotation. Secondly, lysozyme-coated particles aggregate reasonably well, but the flotation efficiency of their aggregates is relatively low. Separation of either of these two sub-micrometer particles from a particle suspension by flotation will be inefficient. These particles are therefore regarded as difficult-floatable components. Additives could be introduced to change the aggregation behaviour and flotation behaviour of these particles, but the focus in this work is on separation without specific additives. Casein-coated particles and unmodified polystyrene particles with amino and sulphate surface groups could serve as the floating component because both their aggregation rates and flotation rates were of sufficient magnitude. Of these particles, the casein-coated particles are an interesting candidate for further investigation because of the biological nature of its surface groups and the influence of brush repulsion on their aggregation behaviour. In The feasibility of the separation of casein-coated and BSA-coated particles from their particle mixture using a combination of selective aggregation and selective flotation mainly depends on the aggregation behaviour of the particles in the mixture. For obtaining a selective flotation process the BSA-coated particles should not form aggregates under the conditions that are required for aggregation of the casein-coated particles. Even though the calculated stability ratios (  At pH values above pH 6.0 the particle mixture is stable according to aggregation experiments that were presented in the previous section. At pH 5.5 the particle mixture was stable as well. Under both conditions the observations are in reasonable agreement with the stability that is expected on the basis of Quantification of heteroaggregation and homoaggregation, and particle separation by selective flotation requires a method to distinguish between the two types of particles. In this work we made use of fluorescent and non-fluorescent particles. The covalently casein-coated particles were non-fluorescent and the fluorescent particles were coated with BSA. The latter type of particles was in this case made by passive adsorption of BSA onto fluorescent sulphate polystyrene particles. The difference between a passively adsorbed coating and a covalently bound BSA coating was of little influence on the particle properties because the zeta-potential and aggregation behaviour of these particles was similar to that of the covalently BSA-coated particles.  Even though the analysis in the actual experiment was less accurate in comparison to the calibration, we may conclude that separation in the batch flotation process did occur. This is expected only if selective aggregation of the casein-coated particles occurred, because both particles have similar flotation behaviour according to The observed flotation behaviour for the protein-coated particles cannot be explained on the basis of the Van der Waals interaction, electrostatic interaction and hydrophobic interaction between the particles and air bubbles. We conclude that other effects are dominant during the attachment of these particles to air bubbles. The fact that similar behaviour was found for the protein molecules in solution points out that kinetic effects in the adsorption process that are related to the protein structure control the process. The aggregation behaviour of the protein-coated particles at high ionic strength was in qualitative agreement with the DLVO theory only when the so-called hydrophobic attraction was taken into account. Moreover, brush repulsion needed to be taken into account to explain the observed differences in aggregation behaviour because the differences in the attractive forces were not sufficient to explain the observed differences in aggregation behaviour under conditions where the electrostatic interaction was negligible, i.e. in 1 The observed differences in aggregation and flotation behaviour of the particles imply that separation by selective aggregation in combination with flotation should be feasible for all binary particle mixtures composed of the investigated protein-coated particles when heteroaggregation can be prevented. The aggregation behaviour and flotation behaviour of the investigated particles depend on different mechanisms, i.e. brush repulsion plays an important role in aggregation while the flotation behaviour is governed by kinetic effects in the adsorption process. This allows for manipulation of one of these processes without causing major changes in the other process, which makes the separation process very flexible. The good agreement between the force–distance curves and the aggregation behaviour of casein-coated particles allowed for construction of a window of operation for selective aggregation and selective flotation of casein-coated particles from a mixture with BSA-coated particles. From this window of operation conditions were selected where selective aggregation in combination with batch flotation should be feasible. Experimental verification showed that selective aggregation and thus selective flotation under these conditions did indeed occur. The aggregation selectivity for this binary particle mixture benefited from differences in the balance between the attractive forces and brush repulsion as well as differences in the iso-electric points of the particles. A proof of principle was thus given for the methodology of separation using a combination of selective aggregation and flotation with application to bioparticle mixtures. Product purification from bioparticle mixtures using selective aggregation in combination with selective flotation may require multiple separation steps. This requires aggregate break up in between steps in case heteroaggregation cannot be prevented. In many cases aggregates can be broken up by changing the pH to create electrostatic repulsion between the particles, by increasing the brush repulsion, and/or by applying shear to the aggregates. Feasibility of the application of this separation method will therefore mainly depend on the selectivity of the aggregation process. When selective aggregation is accomplished and aggregate sizes are large enough, other separation methods, such as centrifugation, may become applicable as well. However, particle–particle separation by flotation is more versatile because it makes use of surface properties in addition to the size and/or density differences that are utilised by conventional bioseparation techniques, such as filtration and centrifugation. The authors would like to thank Simone Herreilers for her assistance with the flotation experiments. The Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs is gratefully acknowledged for the partial sponsoring of this work through EET program (EETK99114) “Biodegradable Latex with Programmable Properties”.