Total elbow arthroplasty continues to evolve and its indications have expanded to include acute distal humerus fractures, post-traumatic osteoarthritis, distal humerus nonunions and reconstruction following tumor resection. Elbow arthroplasty is successful with regard to pain relief, motion and function. Its complicate rate, however, remains higher than arthroplasty of other joints. The overall success rate is best for patients with inflammatory arthritis and elderly patients with acute distal humerus fractures and is worse for patients with post-traumatic osteoarthritis. The most common complications of elbow arthroplasty include infection, loosening, wear, triceps weakness and ulnar neuropathy. When revision surgery becomes necessary, bone augmentation techniques provide a reasonable outcome.Ensure joint stability May be used in the presence of ligamentous insufficiency May be used in the presence of severe bone loss Better range of motion (soft-tissue release and non-anatomic implantation) Less constrained implants may be associated with a lower risk of wear, loosening and osteolysis Less bony-invasive, which may be beneficial if revision or resection are required Some anatomic humeral components may Increased constraint may result in increased tension to the interface and higher risk of mechanical failure secondary to wear and/or loosening More extensive canal invasion, potentially complicating revision surgery Cannot be used as hemiarthroplasty Component linking may make implantation more difficult Possible failure of the linking mechanism Most require more accurate component positioning in order to ensure proper articular tracking It is possible to subluxate or dislocate the joint Difficult to use when there is the need to compensate for bone loss or ligamentous insufficiency Limited ability for soft-tissue release or non-anatomic implant positioning in patients with stiffness Chronic inflammatory arthropathies Post-traumatic osteoarthritis Acute distal humerus fractures Distal humerus nonunions Extreme intrinsic stiffness/ankylosis Large post-traumatic bone defects Primary osteoarthritis (rare) Haemophilic arthropathy Reconstruction after tumor resection   The distinguishing feature of this category of implant is the physical linking of the humeral and ulnar components at the time of surgery in order to avoid subluxation or dislocation episodes. Early linked implants were highly constrained hinges that only allowed flexion and extension. These implants were associated with a high failure rate secondary to the transmission of high stresses to the implant–cement–bone interface and other design flaws. Currently, most linked implants are semiconstrained: their linking mechanism behaves as a sloppy hinge, allowing some rotational and varus–valgus play. Semiconstrained implants are believed to transmit less stress to the implant interfaces, which associated with other design improvements have resulted in more reliable long-term fixation. The linked semiconstrained implant most commonly used currently is the Coonrad-Morrey prosthesis (  The clinical outcome and long-term survivorship differ from implant to implant, and the results obtained with a given linked or unlinked implant cannot be extrapolated to other members of the same implant family. However, there are a few advantages and disadvantages of each of these two design philosophies ( Linked implants ensure joint stability, even in the presence of severe bone loss or ligamentous insufficiency. These implants not only eliminate one of the main complications of unlinked implants, namely dislocation, but also allow a more aggressive soft-tissue release in patients with preoperative stiffness and deformity, which allows more reliable restoration of elbow motion. On the other hand, the increased constraint associated with implant linking results in increased tension on both the joint surface and the interfaces, which may Some linked implants also allow replacement in the presence of severe bone loss. Many unlinked designs require the humeral condyles and ulnar notch for component fixation. Bone loss compromises fixation of this kind of component and may render the medial or lateral ligament complexes insufficient if the epicondyles are affected. In addition, patients with severe preoperative stiffness may require non-anatomic implantation of the humeral component to raise the joint line, which makes the use of unlinked implants more complicated. However, linked implants do have substantial disadvantages, especially when they are constrained. In those situations where the remaining bone stock and ligamentous structures are adequate, unlinked implants are at least theoretically at less risk of mechanical failure secondary to wear, osteolysis and loosening. As a general rule, the stems of unlinked implants are shorter; this is especially beneficial when revision or resection is required. Some anatomic unlinked humeral components may also be used as hemiarthroplasties. The need for a radial head implant is controversial. On one side, patients Currently published data seem to favour the use of linked semiconstrained implants. Recently designed implants have maintained some of the classic features recognized to improve the outcome of elbow arthroplasty (such as the use of a flange), but provide three potential advantages: The bearing surface design allows the use of a thicker polyethylene subjected to less contact pressure. The instrumentation and design allow a more anatomic reconstruction with more attention being paid to reproduction of the anatomic center of rotation. The components may be linked after being completely seated. The Latitude system is probably the best example of this new generation of elbow arthroplasty. This modular system is linkable, meaning that the surgeon may choose at the end of the case to leave the implant linked or unlinked depending on his or her intraoperative assessment of stability. In addition, to our knowledge, this is the only system that allows conversion of a distal humerus hemiarthroplasty to a total elbow arthroplasty without revising the humeral stem. Inflammatory arthropathies such as rheumatoid arthritis represent the classic indication of elbow arthroplasty. Those patients with more severe involvement (Mayo Clinic stage III to V) experience great improvements in pain and function. In addition, the polyarticular nature of these conditions may limit the overall activity level of these patients, with a low rate of wear and loosening. In the earlier stages of rheumatoid arthritis, there is usually enough bone stock and ligamentous integrity to allow the use of unlinked implants. The successful outcome of elbow arthroplasty in inflammatory conditions prompted its use for the treatment of other conditions ( Acute comminuted distal humerus fractures in elderly patients or those with previous articular degeneration have emerged as one of the most common indications for elbow arthroplasty in some countries. Stable internal fixation may be difficult to achieve in those cases with severe osteopenia. It is important to emphasize that this is a selective indication, as most patients with distal humerus fractures are best treated with open reduction and internal fixation. Other indications for elbow arthroplasty include the salvage of distal humerus nonunion in elderly patients, large post-traumatic defects, as well as elbow reconstruction after tumor resection. Primary osteoarthritis of the elbow usually affects younger patients and is treated successfully in many patients with joint debridement procedures such as osteocapsular arthroplasty. Most of the surgical approaches used for implantation of an elbow arthroplasty require mobilization of the elbow extensor mechanism. Subcutaneous ulnar nerve transposition is routinely performed by most surgeons, but still remains an area of controversy. The author’s preferred exposure is the triceps-reflecting Bryan–Morrey approach ( The approach described by Bryan and Morrey ( Splitting the triceps in the midline with detachment of its medial and lateral halves from the olecranon also provides a good exposure. The main advantage of this approach is maintenance of the extensor mechanism centralized over the olecranon, but transmuscular approaches are in general less appealing and the repair of the medial half is sometimes unsatisfactory. The so-called ‘triceps-tongue’ maintains intact the strong attachment of the triceps on the olecranon and still provides a very good exposure. In some specific circumstances it is possible to perform the replacement by working on both sides of the triceps (so-called bilaterotricipital approach, The bony preparation is different for each particular system. Most components are stemmed and require preparation of the humeral and ulnar canals with rasps and broaches. The author uses the Coonrad-Morrey and the Latitude systems. With these systems, the humeral side is prepared first after exposing the joint and releasing the lateral and medial collateral ligaments. The humeral canal is identified and used as a reference to cut a yoke-shaped segment of The ulnar canal is usually relatively narrow, which requires the use of a small flexible cannula to introduce the cement, which should be applied very early. Preoperative stiffness or deformity usually requires extensive soft-tissue balancing and releases. Limited extension may be corrected by anterior capsular release and proximal placement of the humeral component with elevation of the joint line. Limited flexion is corrected by posterior capsular release and occasionally resection of the anterior aspect of the coronoid. The goal of the early phase of postoperative treatment consists of limited postoperative edema. The elbow is immobilized in extension with an anterior plaster splint and a bulky dressing and the upper extremity is kept elevated for the first 24–48 hours. When a linked arthroplasty is used, elbow motion without protection may be initiated in the first few days after surgery depending on the aspect of the wound. Most surgeons keep the elbow immobilized for approximately two weeks after using an unlinked elbow arthroplasty to protect the ligamentous structures and decrease the risk of instability. A nocturnal extension splint is useful for the first few weeks after surgery when there is a marked preoperative flexion contracture. Elbow extension against resistance should be avoided whenever the extensor mechanism has been violated for exposure. Polyethylene wear is the main limiting factor for the survivorship of current elbow designs. Prior to surgery, patients should understand the need to protect their upper extremity. Empirically, patients are recommended to avoid lifting using the involved upper extremity more than 1 Several studies have documented the outcome of elbow arthroplasty in rheumatoid arthritis using both linked and unlinked implants.   In general, most patients with rheumatoid arthritis experience satisfactory pain relief and functional improvement with both linked and unlinked implants. Most patients maintain a good arc of motion and the rate of mechanical failure is small. Some authors believe that the outcome of elbow arthroplasty is similar to the outcome of hip and knee arthroplasty in rheumatoid patients ( This is one of the most common conditions affecting the elbow joint. Postoperative pain and stiffness are common sequels of elbow trauma. The first step in the evaluation of these patients is to determine how much the articular surface contributes to the patient’s symptoms. Patients with a symptomatic articular surface experience pain with resisted flexion and extension in the mid-arc of motion. The status of the articular surface may be evaluated with radiographs and CT scan. When the articular surface is responsible for most symptoms, the alternative surgical options are somewhat limited and not totally satisfactory. Arthroscopic  More recently, The relatively high mechanical failure rate of elbow arthroplasty in patients with post-traumatic osteoarthritis has been the main driving force for the development of newer implants with supposedly better wear patterns (  There are different philosophies for the use of elbow arthroplasty in distal humerus fractures. The authors’ preferred strategy is to work through a bilaterotricipital approach, resect the fractured fragments, and complete the arthroplasty using the working space created by removal of the fractured distal humerus. When the distal fragments are resected, the collateral ligament complexes and the flexor–pronator and extensor–supinator groups are detached. A linked arthroplasty is needed to compensate for the ligamentous insufficiency. The forearm muscular groups are sutured to the triceps to seal the joint; interestingly, resection of the humeral condyles does not seem to affect grip strength or strength in flexion, extension, pronation, or supination ( The outcome of total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) in selected patients with complex distal humerus fractures is quite satisfactory.  The salvage of distal humerus nonunion in selected patients represents a good indication for elbow arthroplasty. Most distal humerus nonunions are treated with internal fixation and bone grafting. However, elderly patients with osteopenia and very limited bone stock may benefit more from elbow arthroplasty. Total elbow arthroplasty has also been successfully used in patients with severe stiffness or ankylosis ( Deep periprosthetic infection affects the elbow more commonly than other joints. This is attributed to the thin soft-tissue envelope of the elbow as well as the higher risk of infection in patients with relative immune suppression secondary to inflammatory conditions or failed previous surgical procedures for trauma. Currently, the incidence of infection after elbow arthroplasty is estimated to be between 2% and 4% ( The overall rate of ulnar neuropathy is difficult to estimate, as patients with sensory symptoms are not reported accurately on most published studies about elbow arthroplasty. The incidence of severe ulnar neuropathy is probably around 5% ( The rate of extensor mechanism dysfunction is also difficult to analyze in the published literature and is probably underestimated. In Unlinked elbow arthroplasty may be complicated by subluxation or dislocation ( Aseptic loosening and polyethylene have been the leading causes of failure of elbow arthroplasty. The overall rate of aseptic loosening after elbow arthroplasty probably ranges between 5% and 10%, and is different for different implant designs. According to  The increasing use of elbow arthroplasty, especially in younger patients with increased functional demands, has resulted in a substantial increase in the prevalence of revision surgery. Most revisions surgeries require the use of a linked prosthesis, as the severity of bone loss and ligamentous insufficiency in the revision setting rarely permits the use of an unlinked implant. A careful preoperative evaluation of the patient prior to revision surgery is critical for success. The physical examination should consider the condition of the skin, location of previous incisions, range of motion, joint stability, muscle function and strength, as well as the location and function of the ulnar nerve. The possibility of infection should always be considered and investigated with baseline laboratory studies including white cell count, sedimentation rate, and C reactive protein. Joint aspiration for cell count and cultures should probably be considered in every patient and is mandatory if there is a high suspicion of infection or the parameters mentioned above are elevated. Preoperative radiographs should also be analyzed carefully to evaluate the fixation of the components and the severity of bone loss.   In a recent study, Advancements in elbow arthroplasty continue to be made. Isolated distal humerus hemiarthroplasty may be an attractive option for distal humerus fractures and post-traumatic osteoarthritis involving only the distal humerus, especially in younger patients. Although this could be a promising procedure, it is not yet a well-established one. Although unicompartmental radiocapitellar implants are currently available, there is limited information regarding patient outcomes. Just as in other areas of arthroplasty, future developments in elbow arthroplasty are likely to include the use of computer-assisted elbow arthroplasty systems. These systems will allow for computer-assisted bone resection, insertion and positioning that will facilitate accurate determination of the flexion–extension axis of the elbow. The relatively small number of elbow arthroplasties limits surgeon experience; the benefits of computer-assisted surgery would therefore likely be greater than those reported in higher volume procedures such as hip and knee arthroplasty. The field of elbow arthroplasty continues to experience substantial improvements. Currently, elbow replacement represents a successful treatment alternative for patients with inflammatory conditions as well as selected patients with post-traumatic osteoarthritis, elderly patients with low, comminuted distal humerus fractures, the salvage of distal humerus nonunion, ankylosis, haemophilic arthropathy, and elbow reconstruction after tumor resection. Some linked arthroplasty designs seem to be associated with a better outcome The success of elbow arthroplasty depends greatly on the surgeon’s familiarity with the anatomy and surgical approaches to the elbow joint, the proper selection and implantation of prosthetic components, and compliance with postoperative recommendations. Although elbow arthroplasty is sometimes the only option to improve pain and function in a wide range of patients, this procedure may be associated with complications which may be difficult to solve, including infection, extensor mechanism dysfunction, periprosthetic fractures, wear, loosening, and osteolysis. Fortunately, revision techniques developed over the last few years allow successful treatment of some of these complications.