The present work investigated the efficiency and mechanism of immobilization of Pb(II), Cu(II), Cd(II) and Cr(III) metal solutions in kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers. Leaching of heavy metals from the geopolymeric matrix into different aggressive solutions was studied by measuring the amount of metal, pH and conductivity of leachates. The effect of heavy metal concentrations, pressing pressure that employed through preparing geopolymer, and aging time on the geopolymer resistance toward leaching was also studied. The mechanical strength, XRD, XRF and SEM of geopolymers containing heavy metals were investigated. The results indicated that heavy metals could be effectively immobilized in kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers with a release of safe metal ions like Na+ and K+. The immobilization of heavy metals in geopolymer may be due to participation of heavy metal cations in the balance of the negative charge of Al in the frameworks of unreacted zeolite, kaolin and geopolymer phases. Immobilization using kaolin-based geopolymers has lower cost than metakaolin-based geopolymers. The kaoline-based geopolymerization process is of much lower energy cost than metakaolin-based one.The term “geopolymer” is used to describe a family of synthetic alkali aluminosilicate material ( Geopolymerization is thought to occur through dissolution, migration and polymerization of Al and Si precursor species (from metakaolin or fly ash) as well as surface reaction on surface of undissolved particles ( Heavy metals are significant components of many industrial and residual wastes, and preventing their release into the ecosystem is of great interest. There are also many areas worldwide where soils have become contaminated with heavy metals, and the treatment of these soils to prevent mobility of contaminants is becoming very essential ( Solidification/stabilization is a process that involves the mixing of a waste with a binder to reduce the contaminant leachability by both physical (adsorption or encapsulation) and chemical (fixation) means to convert the hazardous waste into an environmentally acceptable waste form for land disposal or construction use ( In the work of The present work deals with geopolymers based on local Jordanian resources, namely kaolin and zeolitic (phillipsite) tuff. This type of geopolymer was prepared and investigated in previous works by the research group of the present article ( The process used in the present work in preparation of kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers is of much lower energy and cost than that used in preparation of most popular metakaolin based geopolymers ( Although metakaolin is more reactive than kaolin in the geopolymerization process, an interesting finding by The important characteristics of kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers that attracted the attention to use them as a host phase for heavy metal waste are: i) The porous zeolite and geopolymer zeolite-like components which has the ability to exhibit high cation exchange with heavy metal cations. ii) The low energy of the geopolymerization process. iii) The low cost of the starting materials: local Jordanian kaolin and zeolitic tuff. iv) The satisfactory mechanical properties of kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers. Accordingly, the aim of the present work is to study the efficiency of kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers in solidification/stabilization of heavy metal solutions, i.e., Pb(II), Cu(II), Cd(II), and Cr(III). Jordanian kaolin was obtained from El-Hiswa deposit, which is located in the south of Jordan about 45 The proportions of geopolymer components employed in the present work depended on those predicted in previous work to have the highest mechanical strength ( X-ray powder diffraction with Cu Kα radiation was utilized to examine SMG samples using PANalytical's X'Pert PRO X-ray diffraction system at 40 Except where it was notified, all data in the present work were obtained at the SMG age of minimum 30 For the purpose of measuring mechanical strength, SMG with cylindrical shapes (28 The SMG discs were immersed in 20.0 The pH of leachate solutions obtained in The effect of changing some conditions used in the preparation of SMG ( The XRD patterns of some SMG samples were given in The most significant change in the XRD patters of SMG samples when compared to those containing no metals (GWSM) was observed for the peak at 29.5° 2Ɵ in the XRD pattern of SPbG ( The XRF data of the GWSM and SMG samples with stabilized 1000 The % of metals in the GWSM samples as well as SMG samples before and after leaching with distilled water (the upper and lower parts of The SEM views of selected SMG samples were given in The results of mechanical strength tests of SMG cylinders were given in However, when immersed in water, the mechanical strength values of the SMG cylinders (5–8 Leaching of metal ions from the SMG discs was used as an expression of the efficiency of immobilization of metal ions in the geopolymer matrix. The leaching was investigated using deionized water, 0.1 The results of Pb leaching from SPbG discs were given in The % leaching of Cd from SCdG was negligible using deionized water, 0.1 The % leaching of Cu was much lower than that obtained in the case of Pb, but higher than that of Cd. However, the % leaching of Cr was negligible and was much lower than that obtained in the case of Pb and Cu. It is clear from If the % leaching of metals from the SMG matrix by HCl solution is high, then the leaching may be due to dissolution of metal hydroxide, metal carbonate, metal silicates and phillipsite. This was observed (  Two concentrations of 200 and 1000 In order to protect the SPbG discs (1000 A number of GPbS discs were prepared according to the procedure described in The change of pH of leachates by repeating leaching of SPbG discs was given in Two leachings with 20 The SMG discs were made in contact with 100.0 As shown in This is the reverse of the order of %leaching of heavy metals ( As shown in The cost, fuel/electricity usage and CO Heavy metals were successfully immobilized in kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers especially when high metal concentrations were employed. The immobilization method studied is of lower energy and cost than metakaolin based geopolymers. Since kaolin/zeolite based geopolymerization involves partial dissolution of kaolin, it is most probable that heavy metals are involved in surface reactions. Depending on the leaching, conductivity and XRF studies, heavy metals are thought to balance the negative charge of tetrahedral Al in unreacted zeolite and geopolymer frameworks. The more heavy metals immobilized in the geopolymer, the more exchangeable ions (Na Physical encapsulation, formation of metal hydroxides or carbonates and silicates are not probable mechanisms for immobilization of metals in kaolin/zeolite based geopolymers. Since mechanical and XRD properties of geopolymers were not affected by incorporation of heavy metals, then there is no evidence for involvement of heavy metals in new reaction pathways of geopolymerization. The immobilization process developed in the present article has an advantage over adsorption process studied by the authors of the present article previously. After adsorption process, metal ions could be desorbed in 100% in the case of kaolin, 50% in the case of zeolite and 40–60% in the case of geopolymers after 24  Geopolymer with stabilized metal. Geopolymer with stabilized lead. Geopolymer with stabilized cadmium. Geopolymer with stabilized copper. Geopolymer with stabilized chromium. Geopolymer without stabilized metal. The authors would like to express great thanks for the Scientific Research Support Fund of the