Staphylococcus aureus adhesion and osteoblast functions were assessed on functionalized poly(methyl methacrylate)-based terpolymers bearing randomly distributed carboxylate and sulfonate groups. These terpolymers were synthesized by radical polymerization, characterized by nuclear resonance spectroscopy and classified by the ratio R=[COO−/COO−+SO3
                     −] in the range 0.5–0.8. Bacterial adhesion study showed that fibronectin-coated terpolymers with R varying from 0.5 to 0.8 exhibited inhibition rate of S. aureus adhesion from 90% to 98% as compared to the adhesion on unfunctionalized poly(methyl methacrylate). In contrast, the adhesion of osteoblasts onto the same functionalized terpolymers was decreased by 20% when compared to the results obtained on poly(methyl methacrylate). While the amount of attached osteoblasts are similar onto all the functionalized terpolymers whatever its R value, the cell proliferation was different and was found to vary with R in the range 0.5–0.8. Osteoblast proliferation, alkaline phosphatase activity and accumulation of calcium in the extracellular matrix of these cells, cultured on the functionalized terpolymers with R equal to 0.7–0.8 were similar to that observed onto non-functionalized poly(methyl methacrylate). In contrast, osteoblast proliferation was inhibited on terpolymers with an R value around 0.6. These results provide evidence that functionalized poly(methyl methacrylate)-based terpolymers with R ratio equaling 0.7–0.8 simultaneously inhibit bacteria adhesion and support osteoblast functions pertinent to new bone formation. These functionalized polymers could, therefore, be used as coating or grafted on orthopedic and dental implants to render them both bone compatible and able to prevent bacterial infection.Implant-material-related infection is a major clinical problem, which may arise from local contamination (e.g., during surgery) but may affect other distant anatomical sites and organs through migration of pathological microorganisms in the blood circulation. Dental Bacterial adhesion to substrates, a critical prerequisite for subsequent functions of these microorganisms, leading to colonization of polymer and metallic biomaterials is mediated by pre-adsorbed proteins present in body fluids and tissues and plays a key role in implant-related infection. For this reason, several proteins (such as fibronectin, fibrinogen, vitronectin and collagen) which adsorb onto implant surfaces and also contain epitopes recognized by adhesins receptors on the Adsorbed, adhesive proteins, however, also mediate interactions of eukaryotic cells on biomaterials. In fact, the clinical success of bone implants is critically dependent on strong bonding of the surrounding bone tissue on implant-material surfaces. At the cellular level, such outcome requires specific adsorbed proteins mediating select cell (e.g., osteoblast but not fibroblast) adhesion and subsequent functions pertinent to neotissue formation. Today, these aspects, which are of critical importance in orthopedics and dentistry, have not been investigated. For these reasons, the present in vitro study investigated the effect of ionic composition on functionalized PMMA-based terpolymers on both Methyl methacrylate (MMA), methacrylic acid (MA) and thermal initiator 2,2-azobis-isobutyronitrile were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Quentin Fallavier, France). Sodium styrene sulfonate (NaSS) and Triton X-100 were purchased from Fluka BioChemika AG (Buchs, Switzerland). Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) was from Life Technologies (Grand Island, NY, USA) and fetal calf serum was from AbCys (Paris, France). The bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) kit was purchased from Pierce Biotechnology (Brebières, France). The skim milk was from Difco Laboratories (Becton Dickinson France SAS, Le Pont-De-Claix, France). Mueller Hinton Broth medium was from Sanofi-Pasteur (France). The RNeasy Functionalized PMMA-based polymers were synthesized by radical co-polymerization and were characterized by nuclear resonance spectroscopy as previously described At the end of the respective chemical reactions, the terpolymers were precipitated into water. PMMA and PMMA-based terpolymers were filtered from DMSO solutions and molded into disks (16  The adhesion of Primary osteoblasts cells were isolated using published techniques The osteoblastic phenotype of these cells was confirmed by alkaline phosphatase activity, mRNA expression of procollagen and osteocalcin, and accumulation of calcium-containing mineral deposits in the extracellular matrix according to established methods The osteoblast functions examined in the present in vitro study are described in the following sections. Each polymer sample (2.5 Osteoblasts in DMEM/10% FCS were seeded onto various samples and adhered for 1 or 4 Cell proliferation on the samples (terpolymers, PMMA and control) was monitored for up to 15 consecutive days. At the prescribed time points, cell DNA-content was determined using the DNA-intercalating PicoGreen reagent (Molecular Probes, Inc.). Briefly, the cell extracts were obtained as follows: osteoblasts were collected using a rubber policeman, solubilized in extract buffer (100 Alkaline phophatase activity (ALP) in osteoblasts extracts, from culture up to 15 days was determined as previously described The presence of calcium-containing deposits in osteoblasts cultured on the samples was determined after 15 days of culture. Calcein was used to visualize calcium-containing nodules present in osteoblast cultures following established methods Data were expressed as mean values±SD of three independent experiments performed in triplicate. Statistical analyses used Neuman–Keuls multiple comparison tests in bacteria experiences and ANOVA with post hoc test Bonferroni/Dunn in osteoblast studies. Significance was defined as a PMMA-based terpolymers were synthesized by radical copolymerization of MMA, MA and NaSS in DMSO according to established procedures Vaudaux et al demonstrated that adherence of Compared to the results obtained on Fn-precoated PMMA, Adhesion process was studied under normal optimal conditions, i.e. on substrates previously pre-incubated in serum-supplemented medium. The adhesion of osteoblasts after 1 and 4 The kinetics of osteoblast proliferation on all the substrates, reported as amounts of DNA at different time periods, is shown in ALP was similar on all the surfaces tested when osteoblasts were cultured for time periods of 1, 3 and 5 days ( The present in vitro study was an investigation of select osteoblast functions when cells were cultured on functionalized PMMA-based terpolymers exhibiting In fact, high inhibition of In contrast to the high inhibition of The results of the present study were, therefore, the first to provide evidence of opposite trends in the adhesion of bacteria and of osteoblasts on the PMMA-based functionalized terpolymers. Since similarly modified substrates were used in all experiments, the differences in the osteoblast adhesion results may be explained on the basis of: (i) the amount of fibronectin present as well as by the presence of other proteins (such as vitronectin), which are present in the serum used routinely in cell cultures and are known to mediate osteoblast adhesion While the same number of osteoblasts attached onto all functionalized PMMA-based polymers, the respective cell proliferation was different and depended on the Investigation of aspects of cell differentiation showed that osteoblasts cultured on functionalized PMMA-based terpolymers P70 and P80 with Taken together the results of the present study provide evidence that functionalized PMMA-based terpolymers with a ratio We thank Prof. Rena Bizios for constructive comments and help in writing the paper. This research was supported by the Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la Recherche, ACI Technologie pour la Santé (02 2 0054 922 E133 R20 222K).