Three upscaled multi-tube photocatalytic reactors designed for integration into HVAC (Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning) systems were proposed and evaluated using a CFD modelling approach, with emphasis on the flow, irradiation and concentration distribution in the reactor and hence, photocatalytic performance. Based on the obtained insights, the best reactor design was selected, further characterized and improved by an additional proof of concept study and eventually converted into practice. Subsequently, the scaled-up prototype was experimentally tested according to the CEN-EN-16846-1 standard (2017) for volatile organic compound (VOC) removal by an external scientific research center. The combined modelling and experimental approach used in this work, leads to essential insights into the design and assessment of photocatalytic reactors. Therefore, this study provides an essential step towards the optimization and commercialization of photocatalytic reactors for HVAC applications.During the last decades, photocatalysis has been extensively studied as a remediation for indoor and outdoor air pollution. To this day, however, successful applications of photocatalysis have been restricted to the field of self-cleaning surfaces and coatings Modelling is often proposed as a promising method to speed up the process towards commercial valorization. Although modelling the photocatalytic process is very challenging due to the combined occurrence of different physical and chemical phenomena, several models have been proposed that can accurately predict the performance of a photocatalytic reactor for different realistic operating conditions In our previous work we presented borosilicate glass tubes as a suitable substrate for HVAC applications In this work we present a modelling approach to evaluate and compare a few upscaled, virtual prototypes, based on the concept of multi-tube reactors. Three different designs were studied, which differed in terms of the configuration of light sources used. Based on the obtained insights gained from the preliminary modelling study, we made a selection of the best performing reactor and performed a proof of concept. The final design was built and its performance was tested according to the CEN-EN-16846-1 standard for VOC removal (2017). For the future assessment of photocatalytic prototypes towards commercialization, there is an urgent need for upgraded standards concerning large pilot scale experiments A modelling approach was used to evaluate the flow inside the reactor, irradiation on the catalytic surfaces, pollutant concentration and the photocatalytic performance of the different reactor configurations. A thorough feasibility study of the lab-scaled multi-tube reactor with respect to photocatalytic coating and substrate selection, light permeability and pressure losses of the system, is described in van Walsem et al. (2018) To create a sufficiently fine mesh for the different geometries, 1.8 × 10 Hence, 4 boundary layers were added to the inner catalytic surfaces of the glass tubes. The cylindrical emission of the fluorescent light sources were represented by a curved surface with rectangular boundary elements. The remaining parts of the geometry were meshed with tetrahedral elements. A key factor in the optimization procedure is the distribution of UV light in the reactor and the uniformity of the irradiance on the photocatalytic surfaces. In previous work, a radiation field model was developed in Comsol Multiphysics, in which light is represented as rays, departing from the lamp surface A k- With With To simulate simultaneous adsorption, desorption and reaction at the surface of the tubes, a new species With With With With Three virtual reactor designs were considered to provide insight into the photocatalytic performance of real-scale multi-tube reactors for HVAC applications. The general design was based on a standard diameter of commonly used ventilation ducts, i.e. 16 cm. The total length of the reactor, consisting of coated glass tubes, was set at 30 cm, of which a middle section of 20 cm was occupied by glass tubes ( Design 1 contained 191 coated 7ID9ED tubes and 7 UV-A sources, positioned in the reactor. In design 2, 161 coated 7ID9ED tubes were used and 13 UV-A sources, all of which were positioned within the reactor housing. Finally, design 3 contained 191 coated 7ID9ED tubes, 7 UV-A sources placed inside the reactor housing, and 6 sources placed outside the housing ( Based on the insights gained with respect to the light source configuration from the abovementioned design study, a more practical design for the reactor was proposed and evaluated by means of an additional modelling study. In this design the reactor length was reduced from 30 to 24 cm to match the standard length of the fluorescent UV sources. To compensate for the reduced reactor length, the diameter of the reactor was increased from 16 to 20 cm to provide more photocatalytic surface ( Before assembling the final reactor design, the possibility of using two different coatings and two different UV-light sources was tested. A 10 g L The final reactor design was converted into a prototype. The constructed prototype was then evaluated according to the CEN-EN-16846-1 standard for VOC removal by the CERTECH research center (Seneffe, Belgium). For a detailed description of the methodology, the reader is referred to the abovementioned standard. In short, the tests were carried out in an airtight climate chamber of 1.2 m A modelling approach was used to obtain insights in the flow, irradiation and concentration distribution and consequently the photocatalytic performance of the reactor designs. The purpose of this section is to study the single pass removal capacity in relation to different light source configurations. As the final objective is to create an applicable prototype, it is important to gain insights in the trade-off between energy consumption and removal capacity.   A quantitative comparison of the removal capacity for acetaldehyde in a single pass through the reactor is given in According to Eq. Based on the insights obtained, an improved proof of concept reactor design is proposed, characterized by an internal diameter of 20 cm and total reactor length of 24 cm, as discussed in the methodology section. A total of 9 UV light sources were positioned in the reactor to ensure uniform light distribution and to reach the minimum irradiation criteria of 1 W m The effect of different P25 loaded coatings (10 g L In a final phase, the prototype was constructed according to the theoretical proof of concept design with Sylvania F8W/BLB T5 lamps as UV light sources ( A mixture of VOCs with concentrations in the ppbv range was introduced in the airtight test chamber to study the efficiency of the prototype and the by-product formation. The mixture consisted of formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, acetone, toluene and n-heptane. The GC–MS and HPLC results on the samplings (T0-T3) are reported in According to the CEN-EN-16846-1 standard, the mixture of these 5 VOCs is regarded as a representative composition for indoor air. Hence, the total of the VOC concentrations of the first cycle of the aforementioned experiment ( With The mineralization process was studied at ppmv range concentrations. The VOC mixture consisted of acetaldehyde, acetone, toluene and n-heptane. Formaldehyde was excluded in order to be able to detect it as a possible by-product. The concentration profiles of the VOC mixture and CO Using an approach based on the combined modelling of airflow, mass transfer, irradiation and photocatalytic reactions, we could quantify the photocatalytic performance of three proposed multi-tube reactor designs. In contrast to the devices typically developed for laboratory studies where low flow rates are generally used, mass transfer proved to be the limiting step for reactor designs at high, realistic flow rates. Therefore, the number of fluorescent UV light sources used and their intensity had a limited, but not negligible, effect on the photocatalytic performance of the reactor. To solve this, an important insight was that lower air velocities for the same flow rate and thus a higher residence time of the pollutant were favorable for the performance of the reactor. This can be accomplished by designing shorter, wider reactors. In addition, the number of coated glass tubes that are stacked in the reactor should be sufficient to provide the required photocatalytic surface in the reactor. Based on the acquired insights of the reactor design study and taking into account some practical implications, a final reactor design was suggested and evaluated by means of an additional modelling study. The theoretical proof of concept design was converted into a prototype and consequently evaluated according the CEN-EN-16846-1 standard for VOC removal by an external scientific research center ‘CERTECH’. The prototype was able to eliminate all introduced VOCs at concentrations in the ppbv range without formation of by-product, as demonstrated by Airtoxics and DNPH cartridge samples. An additional experiment at concentrations in the ppmv range showed the mineralization of the VOCs. A small amount of formaldehyde was formed as the only by-product at the start of the experiment and was completely removed during the experiment. This study provides essential insights into reactor design and consequently the assessment of upscaled photocatalytic devices. However, we want to emphasize the need to carry out large-scale experiments to assess the performance of photocatalytic reactors in general and multi-tube reactors in particular. Moreover, proof of concept studies in realistic indoor air conditions can lead to further insights. J.V.W. acknowledges the Agentschap Innoveren & Ondernemen for a PhD fellowship.