Rapid prototyping has been applied so far in the production of special parts at low piece numbers. Currently, ‘rapid prototyping’ gradually is transferred to additive manufacturing opening new applications. At present basically only polyamide (PA) is available as an optimized powder material showing satisfying behavior during processing in laser beam melting (LBM). Other types of polymer powders produced by cryogenic grinding show poor powder flowability as well as an unfavorable particle habitus resulting in poor device quality. In fact, it is challenging to produce laser sintering powders with small particle size, good flowability and processability.
                  We present a novel process chain for the production of spherical polymer micron-sized particles of good flowability that can be applied to a large variety of polymers: in a first step polymer particles are produced by a wet grinding method that are rounded in a second step using a heated downer reactor. To increase the flowability of the cohesive spherical polymer particles further nanoparticles are adhered to the particle surface in the third step. We demonstrate an increase of powder flowability by a factor of 5. The influence of particle habitus and nanoparticle functionalization on powder flowability is discussed in detail.Rapid prototyping applications are mainly applied in the production of special parts at low piece numbers offering the possibility to produce tailor-made designs by formless manufacturing. Currently, an increasing demand to widen the field of application is noticeable, i.e. ‘rapid prototyping’ gradually is transferred to additive manufacturing. However, up to now there are still several major restrictions We present exemplarily for polystyrene (PS) a process chain that is feasible for a large variety of polymer materials (see The successful increase of powder flowability after the consecutive process steps has been monitored using a tensile strength tester The approach proposed for the production of spherically-shaped polymer particles in the size range of 5 to 50 Fumed silica R1 (Evonik Industries) with a primary particle size of 7 DSC characterization of the PS particles was performed at a heating rate of 20 DSC characterization of the PS particles was performed at a heating rate of 20 Particle size distributions of the respective product suspensions obtained by the wet grinding process as well as of suspensions of the rounded particles have been determined by laser diffraction particle sizing using a Mastersizer 2000/Hydro 2000S (Malvern). In the case of wet grinding, the concentrated ethanolic suspensions have been diluted as appropriate prior to measurement with deionized water under addition of small amounts of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, 98% (Merck)) to ensure dispersion stability. In the case of rounded product particles appropriate amounts of the powder have been added to an aqueous SDS solution. Subsequent ultrasonic treatment has been performed to obtain a suitable dispersion for particle size measurements. The rounded polymer micron-sized particles as well as the quality of the nanoparticle coating have been characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Gemini Ultra 55 (Zeiss) device equipped with an InLens detector. An acceleration voltage of 1 Flowability measurements were conducted using a Zimmermann tensile strength tester Wet grinding experiments have been performed using a batch stirred media mill PE5 (Netzsch). Mass fractions of approximately 10% and 19% of milling material have been used in this study. A stress intensity (see The particle rounding was performed in a downer reactor made of stainless steel with a length of 1600 The aerosol was fed into the downer reactor where the polymer particles were molten and the rounding process was performed. The setup of the reactor and its aerosol inlet is outlined in In order to determine appropriate temperature regimes for rounding of the PS comminution product in the downer reactor, the temperature profile for the different heating zones of the three stage heating system was determined using a Type K thermocouple.  Dry particle coating processes of comminuted (irregular) and rounded PS host particles, respectively, were conducted using a tumbling mixer (T2F, Willy A. Bachofen AG). The PS host particles were mixed at 49 Grinding in stirred media mills can be described according to Kwade In the case of polymer feed material and zirconia grinding beads this energy transfer coefficient Φ is close to unity The definition of the stress number SN is given by Eq. The effect of surface tension on the shape of fluids and solids in a molten state is well-known By a concurrent flow of particles and gas backmixing can be avoided In order to estimate the time necessary to heat the feed to the gas temperature in the melting zone of the downer reactor the heat transfer rate from gas (in this case nitrogen) to the polymer core (here PS) is calculated. Due to the low temperatures any heat exchange due to radiation can be neglected. In our case, heating of the polymer particles to the melting temperature is mainly due to convective and, respectively, conductive heat transfer from the surrounding gas to the particles. The change of the internal energy of the particles equals the heat flow from the gas to the particle. The heat transfer is calculated assuming Nu c The starting temperature difference ΔT The solution of Eq. The values for the heat properties of polymer and nitrogen were set to c The time for reaching only 1% of the original temperature difference between gas and particle is determined to be 1.5 The time for reaching only 1% of the original temperature difference between gas and particle is determined to be 1.5 The required residence time necessary for particle rounding depends on the melt viscosity of the polymer and the surface energy. Actually, the characteristic sintering times of non-spherical particles need to be considered (c.f. e.g. An irregular polymer particle obtained by the wet-grinding process shows a rather complex geometry. For our considerations we assumed that the ground particle can be seen as a structure comparable as depicted in The simulation by Kirchhof et al. To convert the dimensionless sintering time t  The shown sintering times have been calculated for particles with a primary particle size x Dry particle coating is a cost-efficient, scalable mixing process for assembling tailor-made composite particles Depending on the size of the host particles, there is an optimum size of guest particles leading to a minimum van der Waals force. Tensile strength allows for predictions of powder flowability. It is indirectly proportional to the flowability, i. e. with decreasing tensile strength flowability increases. Moreover, the tensile strength tester is an appropriate device to investigate adhesion forces in almost uncompacted bulk such as the powder bed in a LBM machine. Furthermore, only a small amount of powder (4.6 Preparation of initial state: The flat surface of an aluminum plate (stamp) is coated with a thin layer of petroleum jelly prior to each investigation. The powdered samples were sieved into a flat aluminum container with a depth of 5 Starting the investigation, the aluminum container with the powder inside is moved towards the aluminum plate with a constant speed of 3.4 Afterwards the aluminum container is separated from the aluminum plate by moving it down with a speed of 1.7 A load cell records concurrently the weight force. By separating the fixed powder layer from the loose powder packed bed F The PS feed material (x The PS feed material (x Prior to rounding, the PS product particles obtained after approximately 3 SEM imaging reveals that the rounding process leads to spherical polymer particles with a defined particle size distribution being, of course, similar to the PSD after the grinding process as sintering conserves the particle volume. SEM images of the rounded PS product obtained for a temperature setting of the three stage heating system of 200 Cumulative particle size distributions Q The maximum solid concentration in the gas flow of the downer reactor before direct contact between two single particles may occur is at least 10 times higher than the concentration applied in the experiments. Thus, considerable process intensification can be achieved by increasing the mass flow of polymer particles. The results of the rounding process can be measured by determining the form factor of the different PS particles after the comminution and after the rounding process. The sphericity of a particle is defined as the surface of a sphere with an equal volume divided by the surface of the measured particle. The maximum value of the sphericity Ψ, reached by a perfect sphere, is 1.  Data on tensile strength of powders obtained after the consecutive process steps, i.e. particles of different shape and surface roughness but comparable particle size distribution, are summarized in A process chain for the production of micron-sized polymer particles with good flowability comprising of wet grinding, a rounding process in a downer reactor and a dry coating step has been successfully established and exemplified for polystyrene (PS). Moreover, the improvement of powder flowability after the consecutive process steps, i.e. rounding of the comminution product and subsequent nanoparticulate coating (increase of surface roughness) has been monitored using a tensile strength tester: the rounded and dry-coated PS powder exhibits a reduced tensile strength of only about 20% of the tensile strength of the edged PS comminution product, i.e. a remarkable improvement of powder flowability can be realized by rounding and dry coating. These properties allow the polymer powders to be applied in LBM processing. Aging of the polymer powders due to thermal treatment during the rounding process is insignificant due to the short average residence times necessary which are only on the second time scale as estimated from literature data. It has been demonstrated that simulation results on viscous-flow sintering   The following are the supplementary data related to this article Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This study has been supported by