In the current study, twenty traditional home-made vinegars collected from different regions of Turkey were characterized in terms of their antioxidant, antimicrobial, mineral and volatile profiles as well as their physicochemical and antimicrobial properties and microbiota. The vinegars were compared to five industrial vinegars according to the characterized properties. Industrial vinegars showed quite high antimicrobial activity while only three traditional vinegars had antimicrobial activity for the all test microorganisms. With respect to these results, traditional vinegars had generally high microbial load; however, they were scarcely detected in industrial vinegars. Physicochemical properties of all vinegars were extremely variable. A total of 61 volatile compounds were determined in the traditional vinegars. The most abundant compounds were α-terpineol and ethyl acetate in some traditional vinegars, while phenethyl alcohol was a common compound detected in the vinegars. Mineral profile of traditional vinegar was determined by using ICP-MS. The most abundant minerals were Na, K and Ca in the vinegars. As a conclusion, traditional Turkish vinegars exhibited very distinct properties independent from raw materials used.Vinegar is a fermented food that is produced by fermentation of fruits and vegetables containing sugar or starch. Vinegar production is composed of a two-stage fermentation process, namely alcohol fermentation and acetic acid fermentation. First stage is alcohol fermentation during which fermentable sugars are converted to ethanol and CO Vinegar has a diversity of uses such as seasoning, salad dressing and flavoring for foods. On the other hand, it has been also used as a health remedy since ancient times ( Vinegar has its unique flavor and aroma which are mainly resulted from acetic acid fermentation. Acetic acid which has a pungent flavor is responsible for the basic sensorial characteristic of vinegar. However, other vinegar constituents including organic acids, volatile compounds and other fermentation products also play a role on its organoleptic properties. Diluted acetic acid is not considered as vinegar and when used as an ingredient in food products, it should be declared by its name ( Twenty five vinegar samples were collected from various cities in Turkey. Twenty vinegars collected were traditionally home-made and the rest of the samples were industrially produced. pH values of the vinegars were measured by using a pH meter (InoLab 720, WTW GmbH, Weilheim, Germany) calibrated with buffer solutions ( A ten mL of vinegar was mixed with 20 mL of distilled water and the mixture was titrated up to pH:8.2 by using 0.1 M NaOH. Total acidity was expressed as acetic acid equivalent ( Brix values of the vinegars were measured using Abbe refractometer (Reichert, Benchtop Refractometers AR 700, New York, USA) calibrated with distilled water. The values were expressed as Brix ( Turbidity values of the vinegars were determined using a turbidimeter (Hach Turbidimeter 2100N, Colorado, USA) ( Color values of the vinegars were measured using a chromameter (Lovibond RT Series Reflectance Tintometer, Amesbury, UK) calibrated with standard calibration scale ( Total phenolic content (TPC) of the vinegars was determined according to Folin-Ciocalteu method described by Total flavonoid content (TFC) of the vinegars was determined according to the method described by The antiradical activity of the vinegars was determined as free DPPH radical scavenging capacity (  Antimicrobial activity of the vinegars was determined by using agar diffusion method against 10 microorganisms ( Vinegars were serially diluted and spread plate technique was used for determination of the microbiological properties of the vinegars. Dichloran Rose Bengal Chloramphenicol (DRBC) Agar was used for detecting the viable cells of molds and yeast. The plates were incubated at 25 °C for 3–5 days. De Man, Rogosa and Sharpe (MRS) Agar were used for detecting the viable cells of lactic acid bacteria. The plates were incubated at 30 °C for 48 h at anaerobic conditions and cream-white colored colonies were counted. Glucose-yeast extract-calcium carbonate (GYC) Agar wasused for detecting the viable cells of acetic acid bacteria. The plates were incubated at 30 °C for 5 days and colonies forming units (cfu) were counted. Mineral analysis was performed according to the method described by Volatile profile of the vinegar samples was determined using a Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry GC–MS (Agilent 7890A GC system, Avondale, USA) equipped with a mass selective detector (Agilent Technologies, Avondale, USA) and HP-5MS capillary column (30 m × 0.250 mm i.d.; film thickness 0.25 μm). A five mL of the vinegar was placed into GC–MS vial and sealed with PTFE-faced silicone septum (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA). While the vials were kept in a hotplate (RCT basic, IKA, Germany) at 40 °C for 60 min, SPME fiber (75 μm, carboxen/polydimethylsiloxane (CAR/PDMS)) (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA) was exposed to the headspace. The volatile compounds adsorbed to the fiber were desorbed from the injection port at 50 °C for 20 min and they were injected to GC–MS in the splitless mode. GC–MS conditions were set as following: The oven temperature was fixed at 40 °C for 10 min, heated to 110 °C at 3 °C/min, from 110 °C to 150 °C at 4 °C/min, and from 150 °C to 210 °C at 10 °C/min, and held at 210 °C for 12 min. Helium gas was used as a carrier and it has a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The voltage of electron ionization detector was 70 eV (  Brix (%) parameter indicates the percentage of soluble solids including sugar, salts and proteins in an aqueous sample. However, Brix generally represents the sugar equivalents in the samples such as vinegar, omitting other soluble materials ( Turbidity is an important quality attribute of liquid foods since consumers generally demand less turbid products for their preferences. Turbidity of juices is a result of presence of suspended solids in the liquid medium. As is seen in Microbiological properties of the vinegars are seen in Color properties of the industrial and traditional vinegar samples are shown in Bioactive properties, namely total phenolic and flavonoid contents (TPCs and TFCs) and DPPH radical scavenging activities of the traditional and industrial vinegar samples are tabulated in Bioactive properties of vinegars can vary in a wide range depending on the type of raw material. The differences in the antioxidant activities among grape juice, wine, and wine vinegars were attributed to their different phenolic contents and compositions and to other non-phenolic antioxidants present in the samples (  Liquids with high acidity such as diluted organic acids and vinegars are capable of inhibiting microbial growth or survival depending on their acidity level. Weak acids including acetic acid show their antimicrobial activity by traversing the microbial membrane to undissociated form and dissociating in accordance with the intracellular pH and liberating a proton in the cytoplasm (  In the present study, volatile compounds found in the traditional and industrial vinegar samples were listed in This study showed that Turkish traditional vinegars have lower antimicrobial activity according to the industrial vinegars. Also, traditional vinegars had higher lactic acid bacteria, acetic acid bacteria, and yeast and mold loads as compared to the industrial samples. Most abundant compounds in some traditional vinegar were determined as α-terpineol and ethyl acetate. Besides, the results determined by using ICP-MS of the study indicated that traditional vinegar is generally richer in Na, K and Ca than other minerals. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that characteristics of the Turkish traditional vinegars were very diverse and different from those of the industrial vinegars.