Cataclastic textures were produced by deforming porous quartz sandstone samples at room temperature, 15–200 MPa confining pressure, and 13–57% strain (γ∼2–20). Particle size distribution (PSD) and fractal dimension (D) values were measured on different digital images of each sample. Over the range of applied axial strain the detectable effects of comminution (particle-size reduction through fracture) on PSD were limited to the population of particles ≥7 μm. Textural variable ψ, named comminution intensity, is defined in terms of total sectional area of particle population greater than a critical size S
                     c. For the Massillon sandstone the S
                     c is close to four times the suggested value for quartz grinding limit. The comminution intensity vs. axial strain data due to the entire range of applied pressure and strain fits a power function of the form ϵ
                     11=ψ
                     
                        m
                     , with 0.25≤m≤0.5. The local strain due to constrained comminution is then predictable by model function ϵ
                     L=ψ
                     
                        n
                     , where n=1/m, with empirical n=2.97 for the studied sandstone. The model predicts relatively monotonous textures for very small and very large strains, while the highest variety of particle size occurs at between 2 and 13% strain. Applications of the method include millimeter to meter scale mapping of the relative degree of comminution in natural fault gouge and the local strain values in experimental samples.Numerous studies and models indicate that cataclastic textures in fault gouge contain information about key processes in creep and seismic behavior of faults, including shear localization (e.g. A significant proportion of the strain in cataclastic deformation is accommodated by the process named constrained comminution ( Massilon sandstone is a well-sorted quartz sandstone from south central Ohio, USA with total porosity of 10.47% (mercury porisometer measurements), average grain-size of 33 μm, and typical composition of 92% quartz, 6% opaque, 1.5% clay minerals. We discuss data related to room temperature triaxial compression experiments on 23 air-dry, and four water-saturated cylindrical specimens with a largest rectangular section of 13×26 mm. The experiments were carried out in a Heard-type liquid medium machine at confining pressures of 15–200 MPa and axial strain ranging from 13 to 57% at 3×10 Experimental mechanical data is presented in The range of PSDs for the deformed Massillon sandstone in The data in To further test the argument that comminution may not play a major role in deformation of particles less than 7 μm in our samples, we compared the Digital images (680×460) of the deformed Massillon sandstone were taken from polished thin sections at 100× magnifications using reflected light optical microscopy. Use of the reflected-light imaging eliminated the ‘noise’ due to mineral composition. Images were taken with a computer-controlled digital still camera from areas inside fault zones in each deformed sample. Individual particle areas were measured automatically based on distinct pixel intensity of the particle surfaces against their background ( The accuracy of particle area measurements for a given magnification is primarily dependent upon image resolution. Visual comparisons between the actual particle shape on the unprocessed image and shape of the overlay used for dimensional measurements show that the image processing software provided reliable area measurements for particles greater than 2-pixel diameter, or 2×(1080 μm/680)=3.37 μm. Furthermore, in the case of comminution intensity values the use of particle size ≥7 μm excluded fine particles such as alteration products, or phyllosilicates that might be difficult to image with reasonable accuracy. The data presented in Given the possible range of It might appear that the fractal dimension data in In general, the textural make-up of brittle fault zones consist of regions of different PSD, posed at various stages of evolution. The comminution intensity function could be used for millimeter to meter scale mapping of local strain in experimental samples and relative magnitude of comminution in natural fault gouge. The interpretation of such textural maps, simulated and/or real, would be helpful in understanding the micromechanical processes of the onset of shear localization, and changes in permeability structure in natural fault zones. It should be noted that the strain estimates would be useful only in quantifying strain due to the latest episode of brittle deformation, although this may not appear to be a serious concern in work with some experimental faults. Also, relationship The microstructural effects of experimental comminution at different axial strains in Massillon sandstone are discernible only at particle size ≥7 μm. The particle size distribution tends to merge for all samples below this particle size. While the textural developments appeared to be insensitive to changes in the applied confining pressure, fractal dimension increased steadily with increased axial strain. The observations suggest that locally, processes other than particle size reduction by fracture might become operative when a critical particle size is reached. Accordingly, local strain due to comminution may be estimated based on the textural parameters characteristics of particles greater than the critical size for the studied rock material. The authors wish to thank Tom Blenkinsop, James P. Evans, and Karen Mair for their highly valuable comments. This research was in part supported by a grant to Hadizadeh from the Office of VP for Research at the University of Louisville.