Flotation tailings dump material of the former lead–zinc mine near Freiberg (Germany) consists of fine grained quartz, feldspar, mica as well as the sulphide minerals pyrite, galena and sphalerite not recovered by flotation. Sphalerite contains, aside from iron, copper and cadmium, significant amounts of indium (up to 0.38% (w/w)) leading to indium contents up to 70mg/kg in the mine tailings. Preliminary thermodynamic assessment showed a comparatively small Eh–pH-range where bioleaching is possible and indium is not hydrolytically precipitated. Shake flask bioleaching of original polymetallic sphalerite ore from the Freiberg mining district (400mg/kg indium) showed maximum zinc and indium recovery rates of almost 100% or 80%, respectively. First bioleaching tests on tailings material achieved zinc and indium yields of up to 80%. A stepwise precipitation process is being developed for indium recovery from the PLS (pregnant leaching solution) consisting of combined iron/indium precipitation and subsequent processing of the indium pre-precipitate.In the Freiberg mining field in the lower Erzgebirge mountains in Germany mining has been carried out from the end of the 12th century until the last third of the 20th century. In this area a polymetallic Ag–Pb–Zn vein deposit was mined until closure in 1969 mainly for silver, lead and zinc ( During the last two decades the dumps were under investigation for environmental reasons, because seepage water leaching especially zinc and cadmium caused heavy metal contaminations in the groundwater plume and the receiving surface water ( Growing industrial demand for critical elements led to various F&E projects for re-assessment of mining residues as potential source of such raw materials. Consequently, the aforementioned tailings materials with their content of residual sphalerite containing a relatively high indium concentration were addressed as subject for study. The dumps consist of fine grained flotation tailings with quartz, feldspar and phyllosilicates as major and the sulphides pyrite, arsenopyrite, sphalerite and galena as minor components ( Within a R&D project sponsored by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Grant no. 033R095B) the tailings dams are currently investigated with regard to recovery of strategically important raw materials accompanied by reducing environmental problems. In 2013 a drilling campaign was carried out and amongst others a 30 Indium extraction from sphalerite concentrates was previously investigated regarding chemical, especially acid pressure leaching by Preliminary thermodynamic assessment showed a comparatively small Eh–pH-range where bioleaching is feasible and indium is not hydrolytically precipitated. For this reason, at first bioleaching of indium from sphalerite was examined. Subsequently the optimised technology was applied to the leaching of material from the flotation tailings dams. For preliminary bioleaching tests in shake flasks and the up-scaling in columns 1 As inoculum for the bioleaching experiments and the column bioleaching a culture obtained from a leachate sample (pH 2.3) of the Maurliden zinc–lead mine (Sweden, BOLIDEN Group) was used. The inoculum contained uncultured acidophilic ferrous iron-oxidising and sulphur-oxidising species and was enriched in modified basal salts medium ( For indium precipitation tests a 1 Various pre-tests were run with different sphalerite grain size fractions resulting in an optimum of 63–200 For the column bioleaching glass columns with a diameter of 3.5 During all experiments redox potential, pH and cell concentration were measured every two days. Periodically and adapted to the leaching course samples for the measurement of Fe Bioleaching experiments in reactor-scale were accomplished in a 2 L glass vessel (bioreactor Fermac 200, Electrolab Biotech Ltd., UK) with 1.5 L modified basal salts medium (100 Samples were taken as described for shake flask experiments and used to measure Fe Regarding processing of PLS preliminary tests on precipitation of In Solids digestion of the different sphalerite and tailing samples for analytics was carried out using Aqua Regia. Fe Measurements of other elements in the resulting solutions and in the leaching solutions were subcontracted to Eurofins Umwelt Ost GmbH. They used standard analysis methods like ICP-MS according to DIN EN ISO 17294-2 (E 29). The leaching experiments at the adjusted pH values (1.6, 1.8, 2.0) differed in the extraction of valuable metals ( At pH 2.0 the bioleaching of zinc and indium was 89.3% and 57.0% (w/w), respectively, hence lower than at pH 1.6 and pH 1.8 ( At pH 1.8 the bioleaching clearly proceeds over the chemical leaching (see Zinc and indium could be recovered by 97.7% (w/w) and 75.2% (w/w), respectively, compared to the chemical leaching with only 6.4% (w/w) zinc and 6.0% (w/w) indium. Bioleaching at pH 1.8 resulted in a lower concentration of arsenic in the leaching solution compared to bioleaching at pH 1.6, probably because of the beginning precipitation of arsenic on ferric iron compounds at pH 1.8. To adapt the bioleaching system to higher zinc concentrations and up-scale the leaching process, the bioleaching was carried out in glass columns with about 230 Bioleaching in reactor-scale was accomplished to investigate reproducibility of previous results of the sphalerite bioleaching on the tailings material (“David Schacht”) and the purpose of up-scaling. In principle, cultivation conditions were adopted from shake flask experiments. The reactor approach was conducted at pH 1.8 at which previously the most promising results were obtained. As visible from Leaching of zinc and indium reached 81% (w/w) and 87% (w/w), respectively, with a decrease of indium after 10 As mentioned above the resulting PLS of the tailings material contains a certain concentration of indium beside high concentrations of iron, zinc and arsenic. This composition makes the conventional recovery technologies for indium, e.g. liquid extraction ( At low pH indium forms chemically stable arsenate phases, e.g. InAsO The indium precipitation behaviour was investigated by recording of neutralisation curves of a pure In This allows for separation of indium from aluminium ions and most of ferric iron as well as the divalent ions (e.g. Zn, Cd, Cu) which are not precipitated at low pH. The mentioned selective precipitation is proposed to be used for precipitation of In from the PLS together with iron containing phases (e.g. schwertmannite, ferrihydrite or iron arsenate) forming a pre-concentrate. The pre-concentrate can be re-dissolved and In can be precipitated after reduction of ferric iron to ferrous iron as In(OH) Tailings of sulphide ore mines contain significant amounts of residual ore and in some cases strategic important elements. Concentrations of valuable metals are relatively low. As tailings were processed by flotation techniques, a regrinding and subsequent re-flotation is mostly not feasible because of low grain size and modified surfaces. For this reason bioleaching is a promising low cost process for economical reprocessing of such materials. Bioleaching does require lower energy supply in comparison to the roasting of the minerals and no sulphuric acid plants are necessary for the processing of the gaseous effluents. Moreover, bioleaching works at relatively moderate acid pH conditions with little attacking of silicates like feldspar or mica. It is generally accepted that two different mechanisms support the bioleaching of the sphalerite mineral: (1) the mineral dissolution via two sub-mechanisms caused by the attack of microbially regenerated ferric iron and (2) the subsequent oxidation of the sulphur compounds that form a layer on the sphalerite surface ( The successful extraction of indium during the leaching experiments even with the tailings material provides optimum preconditions for the recovery of strategically important metals from the residues. Therefore, the work is considered as a contribution to set up the basis for bioleaching techniques in the reprocessing of mining residues. The Project is funded by the