Ion exchange resin is used extensively in the mineral processing industry to recover dissolved species form solution. These processes are usually modeled using a dual resistance model incorporating both external film diffusion and some form of intraparticle diffusivity. Although this type of model is tested and proven in many systems, certain assumptions relating to the model makes it impractical to apply to certain ion exchange operations, especially those involving multi-component ion exchange. This study addresses these short-comings by using a dual kinetic rate model which does not rely on accurately predicting equilibrium conditions. The model assumes that ion exchange takes place from a liquid layer surrounding the particle and that a single rate constant can be used to explain ion exchange kinetics from this ‘proximity’ layer. Furthermore, the concentration of a species in the bulk solution is influenced by the rate at which it is transported into the ‘proximity’ liquid layer. The model has been applied to various systems and proved to be extremely effective. Also, the model was able to describe reversible ion exchange.The manipulation of ion exchange resins to enhance exchange capacity and increase selectivity for one species over another has resulted in the increased use of resin over the last few decades. This increased use of resin has necessitated the development of accurate models in order to predict ion exchange kinetics and equilibrium conditions. The kinetics of ion exchange is generally believed to be diffusion controlled, The successful application of a resistance model relies on the ability to predict equilibrium conditions accurately. This is a result of the assumption that equilibrium exists at the solid/liquid interface where ion exchange/adsorption occurs. Many attempts have been made in this regard including studies by This study attempts to overcome this equilibrium short-coming of resistance models by proposing an ion exchange rate controlling step, thereby eliminating complex iterations in order to obtain liquid phase concentrations at the solid/liquid interface. The following assumptions are made in deriving a general solution decay model for ion exchange: No static equilibrium exists. Any dissolved species may replace any other species on the surface of the ion exchanger. There is no interaction between adsorbed species on the surface of the resin. A liquid layer (proximity layer) surrounds the resin particle and mass transfer kinetics is a linear function of the concentration of a species in this layer and the total number of exchangeable sites on the exchanger particle. This is considered the activity of the system. Bulk solution concentration decay is a function of the solution concentration gradient between the bulk solution and that of the proximity layer. A copper selective chelating resin, Duolite C467 was used in all experiments. This macroporous resin with its polystyrenic matrix has a particle diameter of approximately 0.7 mm. The resin was washed with a NaOH solution before use to ensure that the ion exchanger was in the sodium form. Ten ml resin, measured by the tap method, was contacted with an electrolyte solution containing Cu, Ni and Co sulphates in an agitated one liter vessel. The pH of the solutions were adjusted to four by HCl or NaOH before adding resin. During the model development it was assumed that any species could replace any other species on the surface of the resin. Although this is in all probability true for ion exchange operations it was decided to lump the activity coefficients in order to reduce the number of parameters in the model. This was achieved by assuming that the rate of species This “lumping the lumped” proved to be very effective and efficient. Also, it was assumed that the rate constant A Runga–Kutta numerical technique coupled to an Excel spreadsheet incorporating “solver” was used in order to obtain the parameters required. One set of experimental data is selected and the parameters obtained used to predict other data sets. This procedure was effective and incorporating programming techniques into the estimation step was not required. As with the rate constant The selected resin showed no/little increase in capacity with substantial increases in solution concentration. Hence, it was possible to use a fixed exchange capacity for all experiments using the same type of resin. Often a system will show increased loading capacity at higher equilibrium solution concentrations. This situation will not provide a serious problem when applying the proximity theory. In such cases the effect of the counter ion must be included to ensure that a dynamic equilibrium is reached. The predicted and actual solution concentrations at selected time intervals are shown in The model predictions show a remarkable correlation to experimental values obtained. The maximum average percentage error obtained over the whole spectrum of an experiment was found to be less than 20% with the average value over the eight experiments less than 8%. Furthermore, relatively accurate predictions were obtained at lower solution concentrations, a result which is not always obtained using other modeling techniques. The result of Experiment 1 is illustrated in This study showed that a model based on ion exchange from a liquid layer surrounding the exchanger is effective in simulating solution decay profiles. The activity of the system with respect to a certain species was shown to be a function of the concentration of the proximity layer and the number of exchangeable sites on the resin surface. Finally, solution decay is a function of the concentration gradient between the proximity layer and that of the bulk solution, which also ensures reversibility of the decay profile.