Clean water is not only the product of expensive treatment technology, but also of upstream ecosystems. Yet, the effect of land use on downstream water quality is poorly understood. We investigate the value of ecosystem water purification as an input to the production of drinking water in Sweden. We employ a recently modified empirical approach, complementing ex-ante modelling. We capture plant operator behaviour, rather than assuming rational individuals that value ecosystem services as a factor in the drinking water production function. The GMM technique is applied to estimate the marginal contributions of different land uses to water quality and chemical costs of treatment plants. The analysis is based on upstream land-use data, raw water quality, and chemical costs for a large share of Sweden's municipal surface water treatment plants, for the period 2000 to 2012. Our results show that upstream forests lead to lower levels of E. coli (a pathogen associated with disease outbreaks) in downstream water and indicate the same effect on turbidity (not significant). We also find that turbidity increases treatment costs, but the effect of E. coli remains unclear. Consequently, in addition to water treatment equipment, decision-makers should consider investment in upstream ecosystems.With close to 100,000 lakes, freshwater is abundant in Sweden. Yet, many argue that the water infrastructure has been overlooked for many years, and must be safeguarded. In 2016, 26 major water treatment plants were granted legal status as national interest installations for their strategic importance (Swedish Agency for Marine and Water Management, 2016). There are approximately 1900 treatment plants that produce drinking water for the public in Sweden. Most of these are run by municipalities or municipally owned firms. Providing clean water is expensive and its quality depends on the natural treatment in upstream ecosystems. We investigate the economic implications of the upstream land use on downstream water quality. Considering upstream ecosystems as complements to the water infrastructure, we assess the economic value of their contribution to the production of drinking. In Sweden, consumers pay for their water use but the fee is set below the marginal cost of providing water, which means that many municipalities underinvest in their water infrastructure. Thus, water consumption fees cannot be expected to convey much information about the treatment costs. For this reason, data has been collected directly from the municipal water treatment plants on their chemical use per year. The data for pollution levels at the raw water intake is obtained from the Swedish Geological Survey (SGU). The method used is particularly apt for detecting effects in the relatively short time-spans of surface water dynamics in contrast to ground-water dynamics, thus motivating our choice to focus this study on surface water treatment plants. The majority of water treatment plants in Sweden treat groundwater, but many of these plants are very small. Half of the Swedish population drinks treated surface water, including the three largest cities – Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö. The quality of the surface water is thus of high importance for a large share of the population. The supply of drinking water is also an issue of public safety. To illustrate this, large-scale outbreaks of waterborne disease are uncommon, but as recently as November 2010 approximately 27,000 inhabitants of the Swedish city Östersund were affected by disease after a parasite, Cryptosporidium, was spread through the public water supply from one of the city's treatment plants ( Green water, i.e. precipitation absorbed by biotic elements such as forests, wetlands, grasslands and agriculture, constitutes 65% of all fresh water globally. The remaining part of precipitation flows directly into aquifers. Despite the unquestionable dependence on clean fresh water, the interaction between land use and water services is generally poorly addressed in policy making ( Earlier studies have investigated the treatment cost of raw water turbidity ( The paper is structured as follows: During 1992–2011, 78 waterborne disease outbreaks were reported in Sweden, affecting 70,000 people ( Most water runs great distances through various landscapes before it is collected into a water treatment plant. Even though it is intuitive that different ecosystems have varying influence on water quality, the exact impact of upstream land use on downstream water treatment is poorly understood ( During recent years, increasing quality and availability of GIS data have enabled environmental economists and other researchers to analyse ecosystem effects in new ways. The effect of land use on water quality is multifaceted. Impact is not just from type of land use but also the location of specific land uses relative to the water body where the water quality is measured. One characteristic of ecosystems that is specifically important in densely populated areas is the resilience to shocks. Safe water provision is important to study in this context, since e.g. droughts and waterborne disease outbreaks are risks that grow with population density. The contribution of ecosystems to resilience against such shocks is sometimes referred to as insurance value (  Forest ecosystems are mentioned in the literature as a positive factor for water quality ( The econometric specification is in part based on an assumed cost function of municipal water treatment plants in Sweden. We follow We analyse water quality at treatment plant intakes as a function of upstream land use and rain. The water quality model has the following form: where The chemical cost function of the treatment plants is estimated as follows: To control for potential heteroscedasticity, autocorrelation and endogeneity, estimation is conducted using the GMM estimator based on We tested the instruments' independence of the error term by using the J-test developed by In a previous version of this article, a discussion was held about using fixed or random-effects models, since the Hausman test gave ambiguous results and that for land use (the explanatory variable) variation within panels is strongly dominated by variation between panels, which can hamper inference with fixed-effects estimation. Not only does it imply low levels of statistical significance but estimates can also be imprecise ( Water treatment plants can source either surface- or ground water. We study surface water treatment plants because (1) surface water is affected more directly by land use than is ground water, and (2) surface water plants tend to use the same water treatment techniques, so comparability is high. Out of the 194 surface water treatment plants in Sweden, 77 have provided water quality data to a database maintained by the Swedish Geological Survey (SGU) since the year 2000. Out of these, 76 were chosen as the sample for this study (one treatment plant had to be excluded due to ceased operations). Water treatment plants add data into the SGU database on a voluntary basis. The data presents us with a large range of water quality parameters, even though none of them provide a complete panel dataset, with observed values for all treatment plants and all months in the study period. The potentially relevant variables, for which there were enough observations to enable statistical analysis, are microorganisms, coliform bacteria, Based on two criteria, data availability and relevance in previous studies, the choice was made to study The quality of raw water can affect treatment costs in several ways. Most of the treatment plants in our sample use a mix of physical filters and chemicals to treat water, so factors such as chemical dosage, electricity use and the need for extra personnel can all be affected in the short run. Many Swedish municipalities currently consider large investments in new treatment equipment, such as membrane filters that can cost several hundred million SEK. This is to a large extent a consequence of the cryptosporidium outbreak in Östersund of 2010 as well as expectations that water quality will be reduced in the future due to climate change and/or the current trend of more organic material in many northern European water bodies. Most Swedish water treatment plants are run by their respective municipalities and cost data is only obtainable at the plant, the municipality or the municipal company running it. In several cases, it turned out, that the cost data was not obtainable at all, since reorganizations and/or gaps in administration had led to people not knowing where to find it. Through an e-mail survey all water treatment plants in the sample were asked how much had been spent on water treatment chemicals per year between 2000 and 2014 and how many m Data from 20 different treatment plants was obtained (corresponding to a response rate of 26.3%), with a total of 248 annual observations. A participant flow diagram, describing the sample size in relation to the total population, is presented in Appendix B. None of the treatment plants in the survey reported zero chemical cost for any year. Some of them, however, could not obtain data from all previous years, in which case it is reported as a missing value. Chemical costs were adjusted for inflation using the Swedish consumer price index produced by Statistics Sweden. All variables that will be used in the econometric analysis are briefly presented and defined in GIS data on land use was obtained from three different sources: Lantmäteriet (corresponding to Mapping, Cadastral and Land Registration Authority); SMHI; and the Corine Land Cover (CLC) maps. The latter provides 44 categories of land use for most European countries, with 100*100 m resolution. They are provided for 1990, 2000, 2006 and 2012. A subset of the 44 land-use categories in CLC is available for Sweden, and they form the basis for the empirical analysis. The analysis is principally conducted at the level of the main land-use classes present in Sweden. The literature suggests that forest cover is a particularly under-valued contributor to water purification (e.g. Variation in land use within catchment areas is very low over time, especially for urban and agricultural land uses (see Time-series for land-use changes in the water treatment plant's catchment areas were created for 13 years (2000−2012). However, the fact that we have high frequency (approximately one observation per month) data on water quality, but only three measurements on land use over the entire period poses a dilemma. Following The regression with water quality as a dependent variable, uses detailed monthly data for water flow, while the regression with treatment cost as a dependent employs data at the annual level. GIS data with catchment areas were collected from the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI). It is not clear how distance matters in this context and there is a debate in the water research community about whether the entire catchment or only zones closer to water (riparian zones) matter more for downstream water quality ( In the following section, we present the results on how land use affects water quality, going through the two different parameters of water quality ( Columns 1 and 2 of Including the first lag (the value of the previous period) of It should be noted that coefficients cannot be interpreted straightforwardly from the regression table, since land use is specified as the logarithm of 1 + Whereas the land-use variables are treated as potentially endogenous, rain is assumed to be strictly exogenous. Lags of the land-use variables are thus used as GMM-type instruments, but the length of the panel ( The analysis above is conducted on all land-use changes that happened upstream of any of the water treatment plants in the sample within a circle of 100 km from the plant. Since there is a lack of consensus in previous studies about how to make the choice of this, a test was conducted in which we studied a subset of plants where the maximum distance between land use and plant was reduced to 30 km. However, no significant results were found of land use on water quality. Intuitively, land-use changes closer to the treatment plants should matter more for water quality, but estimation is hampered by the significantly lower rate of land-use change closer to water bodies. It is likely that the situation in Sweden, with relatively low rates of land-use change, requires that larger areas are studied in order to find significant effects. Turbidity has previously been found to notably affect chemical costs in treatment plants. For example, As with Acknowledging that the data for chemical costs in water treatment plants is limited – an unbalanced panel with annual observations from 20 treatment plants over the years 2000–2012 – we studied how costs were affected by raw water quality. GMM estimation results are found in Estimation results are presented with the cost of chemicals per unit of treated water used as the dependent variable. Since only aggregate chemical costs are studied and we have not controlled for the amounts of chemicals used, year fixed effects are included and should to some extent control for price changes on chemicals that affect all treatment plants simultaneously. The need to include time fixed effects was confirmed by a Wald test. Water quantity is found to significantly reduce the unit cost of treated water, thus implying a benefit of scale. Annual rainfall is included in this regression as a control variable, but it is interesting in itself. The estimated elasticity of approximately 0.8 means that a year during which rainfall is 1% above average, chemical costs can be expected to be 0.8% above average. Considering that some climate change models predict up to 40% more precipitation in Sweden in the future ( Because the samples differ between the cost- and quality regression, the results are not comparable. Nevertheless, for illustrative purposes, another way to show how results from this kind of analysis can be interpreted is to consider the full cost function in a back-of-the-envelope calculation, from land use and raw water quality, to treatment cost: Model 4 (in This study assesses the role of upstream land use in the provision of clean drinking water. The study uses a rather novel approach, using first GMM to identify the bio-physical linkages between land use and surface water quality and subsequently, adding an economic dimension through GMM regression analysis of the cost of treating surface water. Using Sweden as a case enables to analyse a context in which surface water is a pressing concern (water is already classified as an issue of national security), and, with vast share and area of forest land and relatively large area of agricultural land which are expected to change in scale and composition in the future. This was done by assessing how raw water quality at 76 water treatment plants is affected by relatively unaltered forestland, recently disturbed forest land, agricultural and other land uses in their upstream catchment areas, using panel data for 14 years. A lower bound estimate of economic value of this water ecosystem service is analysed by connecting raw water quality and chemical costs in the sampled treatment plants. Earlier studies on drinking water quality have focused on turbidity. However, from an epidemiological point of view, turbidity is only an intermediate pollutant (that reduces the effect of treatment technologies). Given the large social cost of waterborne illnesses, the literature has called for more knowledge about the link between land use and pathogens (e.g. To fully capture the value of ecosystem water purification as an intermediate input to municipal water treatment, all costs – short-run and long-run – in Swedish water treatment plants should be studied. It is not unlikely that the long-run cost function of treatment plants could be influenced equally or even more by ecosystem services than the short-run cost function. It would be of interest to study whether water treatment investment is correlated to upstream ecosystem services or if the ownership structure of treatment plants or which political party that happens to be in power matters. These issues are, however, beyond the scope of the current study. Using Sweden for this study, the lessons learned should be of value also for other countries with more pressing need for multi-sector analysis. This owes to e.g. policy challenges stemming from higher population pressure and booming sector-industries such as shale-gas or crop-based biofuel production, all which tend to put national as well as local policy under additional and partly new stress. Low variation over time of land-use variables still hampers the identification strategy used with this analytical framework. We have not found data sources that would allow longer time-series or higher spatial precision. However, rapidly evolving remote sensing technology with higher precision maps will enable further enhancement of the method used here. None. This paper is an output of the Ecosystem Services Accounting for Development (ESAfD) project, funded by the This appendix describes the land-use data extraction process, which was done by the authors using the software QGIS (version 2.10.1). The data was then converted to spreadsheets. The following layers were used: catchment areas from SMHI, the BY-layer (buildings) from the Swedish mapping, cadastral and land registration authority and the so-called Change Layer from CLC. The catchment area layer is available at The water treatment plants were identified in the BY-layer. Its upstream area is identified in the catchment area layer. A circle, called “buffer” in QGIS, with a specific radius (100 km and 30 km) around the water treatment plant is created. The intersection of the circle and the upstream area is separated out, as it is the area relevant to study. The intersection of the “area relevant to study” and the change layer contains all the necessary information. The meta-data, with land-use category before and after the change as well as number of hectares of the area, is extracted to a spreadsheet. 