The present study focused on the selective recovery of poly(vinyl chloride) (PVC)-free polymers from automobile shredder residue (ASR) polymers by ozonation and froth flotation. Three different heavy ASR polymer samples were used. Appropriate alkaline washing was done as a pretreatment for the removal of the pollutants from the ASR polymer surface. The samples grinded by two different methods (two-shaft shear shredder and single-shaft rotary grinder) were compared for the behavior of PVC in the froth flotation. Ozonation with pre-washed by alkaline solution of PVC polymer in ASR has been found to significantly modify the hydrophilicity when compared to PVC polymer without pre-washing with alkaline solution. Whereas, alkaline washing did not change the surface hydrophobicity of other heavy polymers. It is found from the results that ozonation (with alkaline washing) has changed the contact angle of PVC from 80.7° to 55.7°, 82.4° to 59.1° and 82° to 59.6°, whereas little decrease of the contact angle was observed on other heavy ASR polymers. This result indicates that 93.5–96.4% PVC-free ASR polymer was successfully recovered with less than 0.1–0.2% of PVC by the froth flotation after ozonation in different ASR compositions. Ozonation with pre-washed by alkaline solution of ASR has significantly improved the PVC purity.Automobile shredder residue (ASR) generated was estimated to be from 550,000 to 800,000 ASR is a complex mixture of polymer composites, rubber, urethane foams, textiles, glass, wood, sand, gravel, rust and dirt contaminated with fluids and lubricants ( The gravity separation technique has been used for separation of PVC from ASR. The densities of polymers are approximately 0.93 for PE and 0.95 PP, 1.42 PVC, 1.03 PS, 1.27 PET, 1.05 ABS, 1.19 PC, 1.12 PMMA, 1.41 POM, 1.19 nylon and rubber 1.51 It is well known that chlorinated organic compounds are dechlorinated by ozone in water treatment field ( The objective of this research was to develop ASR polymer recycling based on selective recovery of PVC-free polymers from ASR polymers by ozonation and froth flotation in laboratory scale. Appropriate alkaline washing was carried out for the removal of the pollutant on the ASR surface. The ASR polymers grinded by two different methods (two-shaft shear shredder and single-shaft rotary grinder), which relates with shape of polymers, were also evaluated to find the floating/settling behavior in the froth flotation because it control the efficiency of PVC separation. The efficiency was confirmed by three different samples. Similar methods as discussed in this paper were also tested by other researchers but to a lesser extent. Generally end-of-life vehicles are fed into hammer mills (fragmentisers), which reduce the size of the components of the ELVs into fist-sized or even smaller. These are then separated using an array of processes such as air classification, magnetic and eddy current separation into three major material streams: ferrous scrap, non-ferrous scrap and automobile shredder residue (ASR). Ferrous and non-ferrous metals, together accounting for around 75% of an average car. The remaining 25% of an ELVs is termed as automotive shredder residue, it contains non-metallic light fraction polymers like fabrics, wood, rubber, etc., it enclose large size, middle size and fine fractions. These fractions are then separated using an air classification. The ASR large size polymer samples were collected in 2006 at three different automobile recycling plants (A–C) in Chugoku area, Japan. All the ASR large size polymer samples collected were grinded by two different methods (two-shaft shear shredder and single-shaft rotary grinder) in laboratory to homogenize the sample. Then the smaller homogenized ASR samples (5 The ASR polymer surface generally contains oil, grease and other contaminants during the dismantle process at recycling plants. Therefore washing by alkaline solution before ozonation was evaluated. Ten weight percent NaOH solution was added to 10–20 After the alkaline washing, 10 pieces of each ASR polymer were used for further experiments. The polymers were submerged in ultra pure water at around pH 7. Ozonation was carried out using the equipment shown in Contact angle meter (CA-XP Kyowa Interface Science) was used for evaluation of hydrophilicity of ASR polymer samples. The procedure was repeated three times for each sample giving. The standard error in evaluating hydrophilicity using contact angle meter is 0.1°. The froth flotation tests were conducted on 10 pieces or 10 The individual polymer compositions in three ASR samples from different sources were identified and are shown in We evaluated two grinding methods to find the floating/settling behavior of polymers in the froth flotation because the floating/settling behavior of polymers determines the efficiency of PVC separation. In order to compare the effect of grinding method on the flotation/settlement behaviors of PVC, PET and PMMA, two-shaft shear shredder and single-shaft rotary grinder were applied for 10 ASR polymers are polluted by oil, grease, surfactants, etc., which would affect effectiveness of ozonation and the floating/settling behavior of ASR polymers. Therefore, washing by NaOH solution (NaOH washing) was done to clean the polymer surface and the result was evaluated by the change in contact angle by ozonation. The results from sample A are shown in The froth flotation was conducted at several mixing speeds after 30 The froth flotation tests after 30 As summarized in Preliminary economic evaluation based on the present study as follows: ASR generated was estimated in average about 675,000 In this study, two different grinding and alkaline washing methods were evaluated as a pretreatment for selective separation of PVC by the ozonation followed the froth flotation to develop ASR polymer recycling. Two grinding methods by two-shaft shear grinder and single-shift rotary grinder for ASR did not affect the performance of the selective separation method for PVC from ASR. The pre-washing by alkaline solution for ASR polymers enhanced hydrophilicity of PVC surface, whereas it did not change the surface hydrophobicity of the other heavy polymers. As a result, more than 93.5–96.4% PVC-free ASR polymer was successfully recovered with less than 0.1–0.2% of PVC by the froth flotation after ozonation in different ASR compositions. The efficiency was conferred by three different samples. Ozonation with pre-washed by alkaline solution of ASR has significantly improved the PVC purity. This improvement is about 20–30% more than that of without pre-washing PVC polymer. The combination treatment of froth flotation with ozonation is a simple and effective method for separation of PVC from ASR polymers. Authors would like to thank