Plant materials containing high amounts of ash alkalinity can be utilized to increase the pH of acid soils but the chemical and biological processes involved in the release of this alkalinity are not fully understood. In this laboratory study fresh leaf litter from two tree species (Melia azedarach, Castanea sativa) and sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum) trash containing ash alkalinities of 288, 141 and 33 mmolc kg−1 respectively, were mixed at three different rates (4, 16, 32 mg g−1) with acidic topsoil from a Ultic Palexeralf and incubated at 90% WHC and at 25°C for 20 d while monitoring CO2-evolution. Treatment effects were assessed by measuring changes in pH, acid buffering curves and exchangeable cations before and after incubation. Furthermore, soluble organic compounds, mineral N-forms were determined in soil extracts. Immediately after mixing, up to 50% of the added alkalinity was available for acid neutralisation. After incubation, acid neutralisation capacity at pH 4 (ANCpH4) and the pH of the soils with the two higher amendment rates had increased in all treatments. The changes were most pronounced in the Melia amended soils, followed by Castanea and sugarcane and reflected the added amounts of ash alkalinity. In all treatments, soil respiration increased with amendment rate and was closely related to a decline in soluble organic carbon during incubation. Together with the shift from stronger to weaker acidity observed after incubation, this is evidence for the microbial decarboxylation of soluble organic anions.In various parts of the world, acid soils limit crop production and sustainable land use. According to Several studies have shown that the addition of plant materials to acid soils can increase the soil pH appreciably ( While exchange and protonation reactions are expected to occur rapidly upon incorporation of the organic materials into the soil, the alkalinity contained in sparingly soluble organic salts or solid organic complexes with base cations will not be available immediately. This alkalinity will only be released upon microbial decarboxylation as described by The soil used in the incubation study was collected in the Book Book district, New South Wales, Australia (35°22’ S; 147°30’ E) from a pasture supporting subterranean clover and annual volunteer species. Samples were taken from the topsoil (0–10 cm) of an acid red podzolic (Ultic Palexeralf), sieved moist to pass a 2-mm mesh and air-dried. As described by Freshly fallen leaf litter of two tree species, For the incubation study in late 1997, 50 g soil samples were amended with different amounts of the three finely ground litter materials, corresponding to 4, 16 and 32 mg g After incubation of the soils with the various treatments, soluble and exchangeable cations were extracted using 0.1 M BaCl The methodology used to determine the ANC of the soil was a modified discontinuous batch method of Water-soluble soil constituents were extracted by shaking 8-g of soil with 40 ml of 1 mM CaCl Changes in selected soil and biological properties were assessed on data collected at the end of the study using Genstat 5 ( The treatment effects occurring immediately after mixing the amendments with soil are listed in Of the litter materials, Soil incubation for 20-d had only minor effects on pH, ANC and CEC in the lime treatments but caused distinct changes in the different organic amendments ( In the With Compared to inputs with Both ANC In the BaCl The treatment effects on extractable base cations were also evaluated by comparing base cation inputs with the increase in extractable base cations over the control. These calculations show, that in the lime treatments, Ca inputs were extracted almost quantitatively (89–101%) after incubation ( The contribution of N mineralization processes to the acid balance in the soils was evaluated by comparing extractable mineral N-forms before and after incubation. However, net N-mineralization was only observed in the control and lime treatments, in all litter treatments, the initially available mineral N forms were depleted to concentrations close to detection limits during incubation. As a consequence, a net acid consumption was calculated as −0.5 to −0.8 mmol H Microbial respiration was stimulated by all treatments and increased with amendment rates ( In the organic amendments, mineralization rates were calculated assuming that all excess CO Initially, all treatments increased the amount of soluble organic carbon in the CaCl After 20-d of incubation, the amount of extractable organic carbon declined considerably in all treatments except the control ( During incubation, specific absorbance at 280 nm increased in all extracts after incubation ( The immediate increase in ANC after mixing leaf litter with soil shows that some of the added ash alkalinity is present in a readily available form that is released independent of mineralization processes. As shown by the small effects of the litter materials on CEC and base saturation, this rapid buffering is not due to simple exchange reactions as proposed by These immediately available organic buffering substances may be largely present as organic salts of base cations which are extractable with BaCl In the litter amended soils, the initial effect on ANC was generally higher than the subsequent increase in ANC during the 20-d incubation. However, in the The close relationship between CO A strong decline in decomposition rate after this initial phase would further reduce the release of alkalinity from the litter. For From a practical perspective, a more stable pool of potentially available alkalinity can be considered beneficial for the remediation of soil acidity since it is protected from leaching losses. However, for this pool of alkalinity to be effective, it would need to be released over the long term. For the amelioration of acid soils through the introduction of externally produced organic materials containing excess basic cations, this is of minor importance. If only topsoil acidity is considered, a similar effect may be obtained by deep rooting plants, that ‘pump’ alkalinity from deeper soil layers and store it in their foliage. With litter-fall and subsequent release of ash alkalinity, ANC and eventually pH would increase in the topsoil. This would thus lead to a redistribution of alkalinity within the soil profile. However, the basic cations need to be fully released through mineralization as the accumulation of non-exchangeable basic cations in the organic matter of forest floors are the main reason for soil acidification if the soil is poor in alkalinity ( This study has shown that the liming potential of organic amendments for reducing soil acidity is primarily determined by their ash alkalinity. The release of buffering substances from the litter materials is initially not effective in increasing pH or base saturation since basic cations are largely associated with strong acidic organic functional groups. For short-term acid neutralization, mineralization of soluble organic compounds containing basic cations seems to be the most important process. Effects of N mineralization on acidity changes were not relevant due to the low N content of the materials used. Instead, nitrogen availability appears to be a limiting factor in the decomposition process and could have therefore restricted the microbial release of alkalinity. Using ANC as a measure for soil acidity allows one to directly quantify the contribution and release of ash alkalinity by the litter materials. Although ANC is closely related to the amount of exchangeable basic cations, it also quantifies changes in variable charge and thus is particularly important in evaluating the acidity changes in highly weathered tropical soils or organic soil horizons. Furthermore, the simple determination of a buffer curve allows one to differentiate between different strengths of acidity present in the soil which determines the pH change and gives further information about the buffering substances. A short-term evaluation of ash alkalinity release from leaf litter as in our study may not be sufficient to predict longer term effects, as shown by This project was supported by the CSIRO Multi-Divisional Program on Tropical Agri-Exports. The authors would like to thank Dr J. Holt for the determination of microbial biomass and D. Muller and S. Berthelsen for their assistance in the analysis of samples.