We would like to thank the authors of the letter to the editor for their interesting and challenging remarks. In response to their request, we are highlighting some important aspects of our original manuscript [ Our aim in “revisiting the Schatzker classification” was to find a way to localize the lesions responsible for joint instability in three dimensions. In order to do this, we had to establish new anatomical landmarks. The proximal tibial epiphysis has two condyles, each covered by a cartilage surface and a meniscus. Anatomists have accurately described the origin and insertion of the collateral ligaments of the knee; namely, the fibular collateral ligament and the medial collateral ligament [ We appreciate the author’s comments regarding the addition of an extra modifier in order to describe the degree of comminution and thereby provide the ability to localize it within a specific quadrant or quadrants. In order to reconstruct any tibial plateau fracture, one must first establish the principle fracture plane(s), which is/are necessary to establish the exact position of the necessary buttress plating. Experience has shown that the restoration of the continuity and stability of the rim takes precedence over the anatomical reduction of the articular surface. This concept comes from the observation that restoring the tibial plateau rim provides stability to the joint, which is critical for the preservation of joint function. In reviewing the outcomes of plateau fractures, residual articular incongruities appear to be relatively well tolerated, but only when joint stability is restored. The restoration of the coronal plane alignment and the retention and repair of the meniscus if necessary are more critical in determining outcome than articular step-off alone [ None of the authors received payments or services, either directly or indirectly (i.e., via his or her institution), from a third party in support of any aspect of this work. None of the authors, or their institution(s), have had any financial relationship, in the thirty-six months prior to submission of this work, with any entity in the biomedical arena that could be perceived to influence or have the potential to influence what is written in this work. Also, no author has had any other relationships, or has engaged in any other activities, that could be perceived to influence or have the potential to influence what is written in this work. The authors would like to thank Prof. Marcello Henrique Nogueira-Barbosa, MD, Ph.D., associate professor of Radiology, for his contribution in providing the images in