In this study, the boric acid extraction from colemanite ore in aqueous media saturated by CO2 and SO2 gases was studied and the effects of relevant parameters, namely; reaction temperature, solid-to-liquid ratio, mean particle size, stirring speed and reaction time have been investigated on the boric acid extraction from colemanite ore by using the fractional factorial design and central composite design methods. The chosen experimental parameter levels were as follows: reaction temperature, 11.4–58.6 °C; solid-to-liquid ratio, 0.0685–0.1315 g/mL; mean particle size, 0.2835–3 mm; stirring speed, 107–893 rpm; reaction time, 7.125–22.875 min. A model has been developed between the boric acid extraction efficiency from colemanite ore and relevant parameters by means of variance analysis by using the matlab computer software and the obtained model was used to determine optimum conditions. The optimum conditions were found to be as follows: reaction temperature, 41 °C; solid-to-liquid ratio, 0.0685 g/mL; mean particle size, 0.2835 mm; stirring speed, 266 rpm; reaction time, 7 min. The calculated boric acid extraction efficiency from colemanite ore was approximately 99.9% under the optimum conditions.Boron compounds are used in a wide range of industrial applications. The production of boron compounds has increased in recent years, due to increasing demands for these compounds in nuclear technology, the production of heat-resistant materials such as refractories and ceramics; high quality steel, heat-resistant polymers, catalysts, etc. Boron is never found free in nature but invariably occurs as oxide, B Hence, the overall reaction between colemanite and SO Many studies related to dissolution of boron minerals in various media have been performed. Dissolution kinetics of boron minerals in ammonium chloride ( It is known that limestone and dolomite were known as the oldest methods commonly and efficiently used for desulphurization in flue gas. According to the literature, no experimental research on the determination of the optimum conditions for the boric acid extraction from colemanite in aqueous media saturated by CO In this paper, the fractional factorial design and central composite design methods were employed, similar to that described detailed in previous experimental studies ( Where; the number of experiments in factorial design, total number of experiments, the number of central replicates. In the planning and analysis of experimental designs, coded values are usually used instead of absolute values of the variables. The relationship between coded value ( is low level, is high level and The second order model is defined as follows so as to facilitate calculations. Eq. The colemanite ore used in the experiments was provided from Bandýrma Plant of Etibank, Turkey. After the ore was crushed and ground, it was sieved by using ASTM standard sieve and separated into the proper fractions. The chemical composition of the ore was determined by volumetric and gravimetric methods. The result obtained from the samples is given in The experiments were carried out in a glass reactor of 500 mL volume equipped with a mechanical stirrer having a digital controller unit, a thermostat, a back cooler, and gas inlet tube. The temperature of the reaction medium could be controlled within ± Where, In the light of pre-experiments, five parameters, namely; reaction temperature ( At the end of extraction experiments, the regression model for the boric acid extraction efficiency from colemanite ore founded with full second order model relating process response to process parameters obtained by regression analysis is as follows. This full second model is 20 factors, estimates the experimental data very well and the correlation coefficient ( Where; This model in Eq. The main objective of this research is to determine the experimental conditions on the boric acid extraction from colemanite ore in aqueous media saturated by CO Thus, the optimization problem is also defined as; − The optimal boric acid extraction conditions from colemanite ore in aqueous media saturated by CO This research was supported by project number 2003/74 from Atatürk University Research Foundation, Erzurum/Turkey.