Evidence of temperature rise is useful for identifying where within a fault zone earthquake slip has occurred, as well as some attributes of the earthquake such as energy output. Biomarker thermal maturity can elucidate structures within a fault zone that were hotter than surrounding rock, and therefore likely to have hosted earthquakes. We performed a series of friction experiments on thin gouge layers of Woodford shale at slip rates of 1 m/s. Our results show that biomarker thermal maturity can clearly delineate zones of slip that are as thin as 150 μm. We establish that the kinetics of methylphenanthrene reaction previously determined at longer durations and lower temperatures are applicable at seismic slip rates and timescales. Temperature estimates show that once the slipping zone reached ∼500 °C, biomarker reaction was significant, as predicted by the reaction kinetics. Our results demonstrate that temperature rise in fault zones is a function of both the work density and power density during the earthquake. Biomarker reactions, along with other Arrhenius-style reactions such as those that lead to dynamic shear weakening, are both a function of slip speed and frictional work.The active slipping zone of a fault during an earthquake can control fault strength, energy dissipation, and rupture propagation ( Earthquake slip is thought to localize deformation onto thin structures (on the order of micrometers in some cases) within the overall fault zone based on field observation (e.g. Temperature rise in fault zones is a useful metric in other respects as well. Theoretical analyses of heat generation during earthquakes suggest that if faults are strong, with coefficient of friction ∼0.6, even small earthquakes should generate temperatures that would cause frictional melt (pseudotachylyte) ( Estimates of earthquake temperature rise also allow for understanding how energy is dissipated during earthquakes. Fracture energy and radiated energy (in the form of seismic waves) are related to stress drop and can be determined through seismic analysis ( Due to the interest in determining fault temperature during earthquakes, there have been a number of temperature proxies developed for fault zones in recent years. While pseudotachylyte (solidified frictional melt) was long the sole accepted indicator of temperature rise during earthquake slip in the rock record ( Recent work shows that biomarker thermal maturity can be used as an earthquake indicator on natural faults that are hosted within sedimentary rocks ( Following Methylphenanthrenes and other polycylic aromatic hydrocarbons are produced during thermal maturation of organic matter. They do not have any biosynthetic source, rather they are the molecular expression of the thermal alteration of bulk organic matter towards lower H/C elemental ratios that ultimately ends at graphite (or diamond at high pressures) ( The differential stability of methylphenanthrene isomers at high temperatures forms the basis of various methylphenanthrene indices, including MPI-3, the ratio of stable Based upon previous experiments, we describe the evolution of methylphenanthrene indices using first-order kinetics ( We performed 11 experiments using SHIVA (Slow to HIgh Velocity rotary-shear friction Apparatus) at the Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia (INGV), Rome, Italy ( For three of the experiments, a K-type thermocouple was placed at the edge of the metal plate mounted on the stationary side of the apparatus. The sample holder used in the thermocouple experiments was composed of steel, whereas the other experiments were conducted in a tungsten carbide sample holder. The two materials have different thermal diffusivities, which we discuss at greater length when modeling temperature rise during the experiments. At the end of each experiment, the sample remained in the rig for up to 15 minutes to allow the sample holder to cool down. After the experiments, a razor blade was used to loosen the sample and this typically allowed for coherent recovery. For most experiments, we could still make out the cross-hatch pattern of the sample holders pressed into the sample. In some cases, usually at longer displacements, there were some slickenlines on the rotating side of the sample, indicating that the whole layer was recovered. After each experiment, the recovered sample was portioned out for biomarker and thin section analysis. Extreme care was taken to minimize the risk of contamination throughout each step of the experimental process. The annular metal rings adjacent to the sample were cleaned with isopropyl alcohol between each experiment and lubricated with vacuum grease. We analyzed the vacuum grease used as a lubricant in the experiments and found that there are no molecular constituents that interfere with our analysis of methylphenanthrenes. We were also careful to test whether the vacuum grease could have penetrated the sample at any step. For instance, we loaded one sample into the holder and pre-compacted it, just as we started every experiment. The sample was then removed from the holder without being sheared to check if the lubricant leads to any contamination during the loading process. No contamination was detected from this procedure. Methylphenanthrenes were analyzed in the Organic Geochemistry Laboratory at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory. The extractable non-polar molecules, including the methylphenanthrenes (MPs), were extracted from the rock with an organic solvent. Because this extract contains thousands of compounds and is difficult to analyze, the extract was purified to isolate the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) fraction containing the MPs. This purified fraction was then analyzed for methylphenanthrene concentrations using gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). Detailed methods can be found in the supplement. We performed 11 experiments capturing a range of temperature rise by varying normal stress and total displacement ( The mechanical data show repeatability between experiments, with peak shear strength of ∼6 MPa and a “steady-state” value of 2–3 MPa for experiments conducted at 10 MPa normal stress ( Thin sections of our samples reveal that the high velocity experiments all contain a thin layer ( We analyze the biomarker data as a function of slip, work, and power, in order to assess the most important controls on thermal maturity. The two largest displacement experiments show clear maturation, whereas the experiments near 15 m slip both show slight change in maturity. The experiment with the next highest total displacement (16 m) was performed at 5 MPa normal stress and shows only slight reaction. Two experiments were conducted at 10 MPa normal stress for 10 m of slip (S965 and S1290), and should have similar temperature rise. However, the difference in MPI-4 between the two experiments is larger than the analytical uncertainty on replicate extractions of the Woodford Shale starting material and thus likely reflects real differences in thermal history. Experiment, S1290 was performed with a steel sample holder that has a lower thermal diffusivity compared to the tungsten carbide sample holder used for experiment S965. Therefore the slightly higher MPI-4 of S1290 could be due to the lower thermal diffusivity of the steel allowing for higher temperature to be achieved. Little reaction is evident in S965, nor in other experiments with less than 10 m of slip, including the double-slip experiment. A more fundamental way to analyze the parameter space of the experiments is to consider the product of the total slip and shear stress, i.e. work density (or work per unit area). The work density for each experiment is the area under the shear stress vs. displacement curve ( The experiments discussed above demonstrate that biomarkers measurably react during earthquakes (with durations under one minute), as long as slip and/or stresses are large enough such as in larger magnitude events at seismogenic depths ( The next piece of information that would be useful to glean from these experiments is temperature rise. For most experiments, we did not have a means for directly measuring temperature. Even in the three experiments where thermocouples were placed against the stationary side of the gouge layer, the thermocouples were approximately 2 mm away from the PSZ and unable to capture maximum temperatures. The maximum temperature in all three experiments recorded by the thermocouple was ∼300 °C, which is much lower than the temperature expected in the center of the slipping zone based on Equation Moreover, simple one-dimensional heat diffusion models in just the gouge layer (Equation Instead, we model temperature during the experiments using a two-dimensional COMSOL model that includes the properties of the gouge, tungsten carbide and steel sample holders, as well as the geometry of the rig itself (see Supplementary material). In this case, the shear stress and displacement history for each experiment were used to calculate temperature rise. We then use the time–temperature history generated by the COMSOL model to calculate the resulting MPI-4 values for the PSZ through numerical integration of the differential form of equation As an example, we take a prospective approach and analyze the results as if these rocks were collected at an outcrop. We forward model temperature rise on a slipping fault (Equation Recent studies have shown that the power density is important in controlling the temperature during sliding, and therefore controls the activation of a suite of dynamic weakening mechanisms ( In our model, we vary power and work densities through changes in velocity and slip respectively. There are only a handful of estimates of frictional work during natural earthquakes ( As temperature rise during earthquakes is an important parameter that we wish to explore in fault zones, better kinetic and thermodynamic constraints on reactions of interest need to be developed. Often, just temperature is cited as necessary for a reaction to take place (such as melting of certain minerals, decarbonation, etc.) when in fact most of these reactions are kinetically controlled and therefore a function of both time and temperature. Consequently, measurements of a single kinetically-controlled parameter on a fault yields non-unique solutions for temperature rise (e.g. compare cross-cutting contours of High-velocity friction experiments demonstrate that biomarkers react at the time scales of earthquakes. Post-experiment microstructural analysis shows that high velocity experiments localize slip in a 50–150 μm slip zone, whereas slower experiments deform the entire gouge layer. When subsampled, the biomarkers in these localized slip zones are more thermally mature than the rest of the sample. Bulk measurements of the entire sample represent a mix between the more and less mature parts. Estimates of temperature rise from reaction kinetics agree well with numerical models that include the surrounding metal as a heat sink. Both time and temperature contribute to reaction extent for biomarkers and most other temperature proxies in fault zones. At the timescales of our experiments (and seismic slip on faults), temperatures must exceed ∼500 °C in order for biomarkers to react. Our experiments indicate that biomarkers are an effective tool to identify structures within a fault zone that have experienced seismic slip, and are applicable to a wide range of faults hosted within sedimentary rocks. HMS, PJP and GDT conceived the project and experimental design. HSR, PJP, and HMS conducted biomarker analysis. HSR analyzed microstructures. ES and HSR ran the experiments. SA ran the COMSOL models. HMS wrote the manuscript and all authors contributed. HSR was funded by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.