The morphology of the change of primary Al phase in A356 alloy by electromagnetic stirring and Sr modification of eutectic Si was investigated. The optimum stirring current for the dendritic structure of primary Al phase to change to the globular state was above 15A. The average size of primary Al phase with the globular shape was 54μm. The addition of Sr more than 50ppm was found to modify remarkably the eutectic Si with the growth of the primary Al. The growth of the Al phase is probably due to the increase of stirring time through the extended mushy zone of the alloy with Sr addition. With the same amount of Sr addition, the eutectic Si size of stirred cast alloy was smaller than that of non-stirred alloy. This is presumed to be because of the morphology change of the eutectic Si particles by the homogenized Sr modification effect through the stirring.The processing of materials in the semi-solid state is a relatively new technology that offers distinct advantages over similar methods for near-net-shape making. There is already very extensive literature in this field, starting with the earlier papers by Flemings et al. In recent years, globulitic structured pre-material for thixoforming has been produced using a number of techniques in hypoeutectic Al–Si alloys. Among these methods, electromagnetic stirring has been recognized as the most efficient way to produce suitable feedstock material with thixotropic behavior. On the other hand, the mechanical properties of these alloys such as dynamic fracture toughness depend on the morphology of the eutectic Si particles In this study, the primary Al phases are controlled by an electromagnetic stirrer, which is designed be to applied to continuous casting. Initially, the optimum condition of electromagnetic stirring are confirmed and the influence of electromagnetic on both the primary Al and eutectic Si particles with Sr modification are investigated. The equipment is shown in An electromagnetic stirrer powered by an induction motor of three phases and two poles, 15 horsepower, operating at 60 1.5 After the A356 alloys were melted at 1023 In order to evaluate the stirring effect on the microstructures, the test samples were taken at a part 10 The morphology of eutectic Si was observed by scanning electron microscopy, and the size was measured by the circular grid method proposed by Fujii et al. The microstructures taken from the semi-solid ingots fabricated with a current of 0, 9, 15 and 22 The variation of primary Al particle size and aspect ratio as functions of current are shown in SEM micrographs of the eutectic Si stirred at 15 The effects of electromagnetic stirring on the average size of the eutectic Si are shown in The optimum current for electromagnetic stirring to obtain non-dendritic and globular structures in this study was 15 Above the addition of 50 The average size of the eutectic Si for the stirred condition was slightly smaller than that for the non-stirred. It is not the direct effect of electromagnetic stirring on the eutectic Si and is probably due to the homogeneous effect of modification by the stirring.