The main purpose of blasting in open pit mines is to produce the feed for crushing stage with the optimum dimensions from in situ rocks. The size distribution of muck pile indicates the efficiency of blasting pattern to reach the required optimum sizes. Nevertheless, there is no mature model to predict fragmentation distribution to date that can be used in various open pit mines. Therefore, a new framework to evaluate and predict fragmentation distribution is presented based on the image analysis approach. For this purpose, the data collected from Jajarm bauxite mine in Iran were used as the sources in this study. The image analysis process was performed by Split-Desktop software to find out fragmentation distribution, uniformity index and average size of the fragmented rocks. Then, two different approaches including the multivariate regression method and the decision-making trial and evaluation laboratory (DEMATEL) technique were incorporated to develop new models of the uniformity index and the average size to improve the Rosin-Rammler function. The performances of the proposed models were evaluated in four blasting operation sites. The results obtained indicate that the regression model possesses a better performance in prediction of the uniformity index and the average size and subsequently the fragmentation distribution in comparison with DEMATEL and conventional Rosin-Rammler models.Drilling and blasting in open pit mines are the crucial stages as the economy of mining industry generally relies on the optimum design of pattern to reach an appropriate fragmentation. The blasting process, in which the optimal fragmentation and desirable displacement are the main goals, should be carefully considered to address two important issues: reduction of mining costs and increase in production efficiency ( Various methods have been proposed to predict rock fragmentation including uncontrollable methods based on physical and mechanical properties of rocks and controllable methods dependent on design factors such as determination of size distribution and fragmented rocks prediction ( Rock fragmentation is a complex dynamic process relating to the interaction between rock mass and explosives. For this reason, a mature model has not yet been developed to meet all mining conditions and geological features ( There are several methods for assessment and prediction of fragmented rock distribution. Image analysis technique has been widely used due to its high capability of visually processing and providing an appropriate alternative for low-accuracy methods ( In addition, various functions are available to predict rock fragmentation, such as Rosin-Rammler and Swebrec functions, which are the most widely used methods with respect to uniformity index and mean fragmentation size. The Rosin-Rammler function is presented by Another empirical equation was developed by Swebrec (    In recent years, image analysis technique has been used for prediction of rock fragmentation by blasting as a high-capability method in mining industry. Uniformity index reflects the uniformity of fragmented rocks’ distribution and depends on various geometric and environmental parameters. Jajarm bauxite mine is located in North Khorasan Province, Iran ( Upper kaolin bauxite (gray to brown in color); Hard bauxite of brown, light brown, gray, olive green colors; Soft shale bauxite of reddish brown color; and Kaolin bauxite of gray to light brown color. In this study, the data from 24 different blasting operations consisting of burden, hole spacing, powder factor, BI, hole diameter, bench height, hole length, and stemming length were collected ( In order to realize the size distribution of blasting operations, the image analysis was carried out by taking several photographs from fragmented muck pile in three steps (after blasting, in the one-third and the two-third of loading by shovel). These photographs were taken randomly in consideration of size variation and two defined scales. In the next step, 15 randomly chosen photographs were selected as the input file for Split-Desktop software, and the outputs including the mean fragmented particles passing from the sieve ( It can be inferred from The statistical description of There is a significant difference between the results obtained from empirical methods and image analysis due to the fact that empirical models are considered as a site-dependent technique. Thus, the existing prediction model was modified in this study, and a new one was proposed for Jajarm bauxite mine using regression and DEMATEL approaches. Since blasting operations in open pit mines are site-dependent, the comparison of these two approaches, in which the first one is based on the actual data obtained from blasting sites and the second one relies on experts’ knowledge and experience, can be useful for determination of the best results. Regression analysis is a set of statistical processing methods for determination of relationship among various variables. The relationship between variables may be either linear or nonlinear. Generally, regression processing is divided into four main steps including variable selection, data collection, identification and model fitting, and validation ( Linear multiple variable model is a kind of linear regression model, which can be described by Eq. The basic of nonlinear regression relies on linear regression. In other words, it is a form of regression processing which can be obtained by a nonlinear function combination set of dependent and independent variables without consideration of linear constraints. This kind of regression has several models that can be categorized into exponential, quadratic, power and other types. In general, nonlinear regression model can be defined as ( DEMATEL is a graph theory based technique. It is practical and useful method for visualizing the structure of complicated causal relations with matrices or directed graphs ( In order to use DEMATEL, the following main steps should be done ( Step 1: generate the average matrix Experts indicate the direct influence that each factor exerts on the others according to an integer scale range: 0 (no influence), 1 (very low influence), 2 (low influence), 3 (high influence), and 4 (very high influence). If there are Step 2: calculate the normalized direct influence matrix The normalized direct influence matrix Step 3: derive the total relation matrix A continuous decrease of the indirect effects of problems along the powers of matrix As described before, Rosin-Rammler function is based on geomechanical and geometric parameters. Geomechanical parameters rely on environmental features and geometric parameters depend on physical conditions and behaviors. For this reason, most of the tectonic parameters (e.g. discontinuities spacing, orientations and dip) do not hold in this relationship and as a result, the Rosin-Rammler function does not guarantee size distribution precisely ( According to the collected blasting data, 20 blasting data were selected as training datasets and 4 blasting data for validation purposes. In order to evaluate the size distribution of blasting in this mine, the input parameters of Rosin-Rammler function were utilized with linear and nonlinear multiple variable regressions. At the first step, all effective parameters in the Jajarm bauxite mine were considered carefully. After that, using SPSS software, a variety of available scenarios based on input data were determined using their correlation and normalization. Consequently, 116 and 84 possible equations were generated for uniformity index ( In order to incorporate the DEMATEL method for evaluation and prediction of rock fragmentation, 13 questionnaires were distributed among mine experts. These questionnaires contain two main matrixes: one for measuring small dimensions and the other for uniformity index. By undertaking step 1 in the DEMATEL method, the average matrices of uniformity index and mean fragment size were generated as shown in The maximum sums of the rows and columns in Based on the elements of matrices Ultimately, the weights of all parameters are computed using Eq. In order to define DEMATEL-based The DEMATEL-based In order to investigate the relationship between uniformity and mean fragment size (i.e. It can be inferred from Capabilities of the proposed models were evaluated on four blasting cases. It can be seen from Four criteria ( According to the visual comparison ( In this paper, a new framework was proposed to predict fragmentation size distribution caused by blasting operation in open pit mining. The proposed framework was developed on the basis of image analysis and incorporating regression and DEMATEL methods in a case study. The main conclusions were drawn from this study as follows: The analysis based on the DEMATEL method shows that The Rosin-Rammler function was more in line with image analysis results compared to other empirical models. The regression model was found to be superior in comparison with the DEMATEL based model to predict the uniformity index with The regression model possessed a higher performance in prediction of the mean fragmentation size when compared to the DEMATEL based model with Modification of the Rosin-Rammler function incorporating regression model which was developed on the basis of field data calculated accurately the fragmentation size distribution in accordance with image analysis method. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.