In this work, a rapid and accurate surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) based on silver nanodots (AgNDs) array substrate method was used to detect Alternaria alternata (A. alternata) in both sterile water and pear juice (an example of complex food matrix). The substrate fabrication conditions were firstly optimized to obtain the maximal SERS enhancement. SERS and Raman mapping methods were then used to scan the A. alternata adsorbed on the surface of the substrate, and the intrinsic and distinct SERS signals of A. alternata were used as the basis for detection. It was found that using A. alternata in sterile water as a model sample, the method was able to detect the A. alternata with a limit of detection (LOD) as low as 1.0 × 103 cfu/mL. Moreover, the newly developed method could also realize rapid detection of A. alternata in pear juice, and the lowest detectable A. alternata concentration was less than 1.0 × 104 cfu/mL. In addition, the A. alternata concentration range from 1.0 × 104 cfu/mL to 1.0 × 106 cfu/mL could be detected by SERS mapping. This study provides a convenient method for the detection of low-level A. alternata in complex food matrix, and further information and guidance for the design of a SERS-based detection.Black spot disease that caused by At present, extensive researches have been conducted on pathogen identification and detection. A number of classical methods including microbiological tests, and biological analyses such as polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA) have been reported for the detection of Over the past decade, Raman spectroscopy, in particular surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) has shown to be a powerful platform for the rapid detection of microbes ( Many studies have demonstrated the great potential of SERS based metallic nanoparticles (NPs) in the detection and identification of a variety of bacteria ( Anodic aluminum oxide (AAO, pore diameter of 50 nm, pitch of holes of 100 nm, and hole depth of 300 nm) template was purchased from Shanghai Muke Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) was obtained from TCI (Shanghai) Development Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), and sterling silver particles (99.999%) was bought from Beijing Zhongjin New Research Material Technology Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). All of the chemicals (dichloromethane, hydrated stannic chloride, hydrochloric acid, phosphoric acid, acetone) used were of analytic grade. The AgNDs array was fabricated using AAO template as an evaporation mask, which was described elsewhere (  A 0.5 μL drop of The SERS spectra were acquired using a Raman microscope (LabRAM HR, HORIBA Scientific, France), with a 785 nm laser as the excitation source. The power of the laser at the sample was set to 50 mW. SERS spectra over a range of 400–1800 cm Pear juice was prepared from fresh pear following the step of denucleation, comminution, filtration, and sterilization. Vacuum evaporation of silver onto the AAO template resulted in the formation of an AgNDs array substrate with ordered structure and the density of the nanodots corresponded closely to the density of nanopores in the AAO template. The arrangement and shape of the nanodots reflected the arrangement and shape of the nanopores in the AAO template. In order to characterize the morphology structure of the AgNDs array, the geometrical structure of the AAO template was firstly characterized. The SEM images of the AAO templates with different pore sizes are shown in AgNDs array substrates were obtained using the above porous AAO as templates. SEM images of the typical AgNDs arrays with different interparticle gap sizes are shown in Silver NPs have been widely used as an active substrate for microbial detection due to their excellent SERS enhancement and the suspension of microbial cells was used by simply mixing with silver NPs to rapidly generate the SERS effect ( Three pieces of substrates with different interparticle gap sizes of 31.25, 26.25, and 16.87 nm were used for experiments. All of these substrates were of the same thickness of 50 nm. The SERS spectra were recorded and are shown in Based on the optimized interparticle gap size (16.87 nm), three pieces of substrates with different thicknesses of 20, 35, and 50 nm were fabricated. The SERS spectra were continuously collected ( The LOD of the label-free SERS based AgNDs array substrate using the traditional data collection method for In order to illustrate the reproducibility of SERS signal, the representative SERS spectra of the It can be seen in The average SERS spectra for different concentrations of For a more quantitative prediction of the response of the AgNDs array substrate, the Raman intensity A 0.5 μL drop of The current developed method was validated in a food matrix by artificially mixing different concentrations of In the current work, a label-free SERS approach for detecting The authors are grateful to the