Laboratory scale leaching tests were carried out in different experimental conditions, with monitoring of gold and silver recovery, the concentration of cyanide used in leaching, solution pH, and precious metal adsorption onto clay. Evidence for the adsorption or re-precipitation of gold from cyanide solutions onto clay minerals is conclusive and indicates that adsorption contributes to the total gold loss from conventional cyanidation. The loss is related to the type of clay, and appears to be affected by the extent of time cyanidation. It was observed that silver adsorption capacity was above 80% and that the degree of adsorption for gold oscillated between 1.68% and 7.49%, depending on the type and characteristics of the evaluated clay.In the process of heap leaching of gold and silver ores, where cyanide solutions are used in the presence of oxygen, both metals dissolve to form cyanide complexes of type X(CN) There are studies which indicate that aurocyanide complexes may be removed from their solutions not only in the presence of clay minerals but also in the presence of quartz and sulphite minerals. This removal of gold may occur via the physical adsorption process or by reduction of the gold cyanide complex at the mineral's surface. The intimate association of clay minerals and submicrometer Au has been recognized since the Carlin deposit was found in the 1970s. Recently, Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) investigation showed submicrometer Au adsorbed on the edges of kaolinite and illite ( It is well known that kaolinite has a heterogeneous surface charge, and the basal surface is believed to carry a constant negative structural charge, which is attributed to the isomorphous substitution of Si   Adsorption of heavy metals onto kaolinite has been investigated in some detail. The results show that adsorption involves complexation of adsorbing ions with aluminol and perhaps silanol, groups which reside predominantly on the crystal edges (   One of the technical problems in heap leaching operations is the high presence of clay minerals associated with low-grade gold–silver ores. The challenge is to attenuate the preg-robbing effect of clays in the metallurgical recovery of gold. Among the techniques for the treatment of argillaceous ores for heap leaching are: (i) blending argillaceous ore with ores of coarse size or sandy characteristics; (ii) clay agglomeration with cement; (iii) washing of the ore; (iv) agglomeration with an organic polymer; and (v) using ion exchange inhibitors, like potassium chloride, KCl ( Excessive clay or the presence of fines may prevent the percolation of the cyanide solution through the heap, the height of which is governed by the permeability factor of the mineralized rock ( The clays carry a strong negative charge that allows them to absorb cations, so that these clays have a high ion exchange capacity, generally by means of the calcium ion ( The capacity of cation exchange is a fundamental property of montmorillonite. This mineral can easily change its ions for other ones in the surrounding aqueous solution. The cation exchange capacity can be defined as the sum of all exchangeable cations that a mineral can adsorb at a certain pH. It is equivalent to the measurement of the mineral's total negative charges. These negative charges can be generated in two different ways: (i) isomorphic substitutions within the structure; and (ii) dissociation of the accessible hydroxide groups, ( The clays associated with ores generally contribute to reducing heap permeability, and also present a deleterious effect on precious metal adsorption in solution, acting as a sponge. They adsorb the Au and Ag cations from the pregnant solution that percolates through the heap ( Clay mineralogy is important to determine heap permeability: montmorillonite clays have different degrees of permeability in relation to kaolin type clays (nontronite and illite) ( Samples of gold ores were collected from Peruvian leach pads. They were crushed and sieved in a closed circuit to less than 2″, with the material above 2″ crushed to < The argillaceous ores used in tests were designated as follows: Sacalla white clay 392 and 432 Sacalla brown clay 392 Sacalla red clay 392. Sacalla ore mineralogical composition presents goethite (50%), quartz (37%), and clays (11%). X-ray diffraction analyses reveal the presence of whitish clays (nontronite and montmorillonite) and, in smaller proportion, small (around 2 Physical and chemical–physical characterization. Silicate minerals, which have a layer structure, and the hydrated iron oxides are able to cause ion exchange reactions with the leaching solutions in such a way that the precious metals are adsorbed and are incorporated onto clay minerals in variable proportions. The important minerals of this group are: gypsum (hydrated calcium sulphate), limonite (hydrated ferric oxide), chlorite (magnesium and aluminum silicates), serpentine (magnesium silicate), muscovite (aluminum and potassium silicate), several micas like vermiculite, talc (hydrated magnesium silicate), kaolin (aluminum silicate), and montmorillonite (silicate of magnesium and calcium). It should be noted that hydrated iron oxides, manganese dioxides and aluminum oxides (FeO3.nHO; MnO2.nHO; and AlO3.nHO) demonstrate the same capacity of ion exchange ( Synthetic solutions in the form of cyanide complexes of gold and silver (Au(CN) The argillaceous auriferous ore was obtained from the Comarsa mine in Peru. Four types of clays from Sacalla were analyzed: white-type montmorillonite (Sacalla 392), brown clay montmorillonite (Sacalla 392), white-type montmorillonite (Sacalla 432), and illite (Sacalla red-type 392), with the aim of evaluating the degree of adsorption of gold and silver on these four types of clays. With the aim of determining the recovery of the precious metals, the speed of their recovery, the demand for reagents, and sensitivity to particle size, the following leaching experiments were set up. Leaching tests were carried out in polyethylene bottles of 2 The leaching was carried out during 168 Free cyanide and pH were readjusted to maintain their initial levels during the leaching cycle, and the water equivalent to the extracted volume of the aliquot recovered for the corresponding chemical analyses. At the end of leaching, the pulp was filtered. The final volume of the pregnant solution was measured at the same time and sampled for chemical analyses. The pH and cyanide concentrations were also determined. The leaching residue was washed, dried, weighed and sent to a chemical laboratory to determine the residual cyanide, and the grade of precious metals obtained. The results shown in The results detailed in Among the clays evaluated, montmorillonite (characterized by the presence of complex aluminum silicates and silica of very plastic red-ochre coloration), absorbs a large amount of water (it absorbs cyanide solutions of gold–silver in its matrix), which increases its volume. Kaolin clays, (characterized by a lower silica content with respect to white clays), have a smaller capacity of water absorption and are less able to absorb cyanide solutions of gold or silver. Finally, in clays of brown-yellowish coloration, residual elements are concentrated (aluminum hydroxide and iron), and this is typically the case with illites. The hydrated aluminum silicates of clays have surfaces with negative charges that can be compensated by the adsorption of cations. In turn, these cations may be displaced by others present in the liquid medium.  It was experimentally verified in leaching tests by agitation that clays exhibit a high capacity of ion exchange, that they have the capacity to adsorb gold and silver ions from solution, and it has been assumed by the results that they assimilate them into their matrixes. It was observed that silver adsorption capacity was above 80% and that the adsorption degree for gold oscillated between 1.68% and 7.49%, depending on the type and characteristics of the evaluated clay. The time interval of between 48 and 96 In the specific case of silver originating in a cyanide solution, it can be confirmed that clay behaves similarly to activated carbon in its high retention of silver metal in the clay source. Thus we may conclude that the preg-robbing mechanism may be one of the main causes of reduction in gold and silver recovery from clay ores when cyanide solutions are used in heap leaching extraction procedures. The authors wish to thank Universidad Nacional de San Luis, Argentina, and Universidad de Oviedo, España, for the support to this project and permission to publish this paper.