Arguments were expressed in In order to describe the variety of pressure fronts in The particle velocities are The solution of the spherical wave equation, in terms of the spherical Hankel-functions h We can determine the appropriate coefficients A A radially symmetric source surface motion, In the case of a “plane-wave expectation” we observe the properties of a monopole source in an assumed uniaxial direction and ignore the other components. The pressure as a scalar remains isotropic, but the radial velocity u If we directly define the source's surface motion as It appears that in cases b) and c) u In the following, we only consider the moduli of the quantities, but split the impedance into its real and imaginary parts because the real part controls the energy partition. Further, all pressure sources have the same phase and strength in this consideration. The physical reason, why this applies in the case of HVD was outlined in We now use this algorithm for a linear, equidistant source array, where all sources show the same strength    In the following we focus our interest on energy partition problems to understand the transition from the benign to the hazardous behavior of bubbles, mainly in assemblies. At this stage, the interaction terms between neighboring sources in arrays is We refer in The power of pressure-wave radiation per unit area is controlled by impedance at the source surface. Re Z/ρc is the ratio of the spherical and plane-wave power of pressure-wave emission. For a single source this ratio varies from very small to unity depending on its size.  For single bubbles, kR increases with the static surrounding pressure p or by an imposed change of its collapse time. This explains the experimental fact that explosions can be triggered by a pressure shock, which does not usually lead directly to initiation. Also, “triggering” is a well-known phenomenon for vapor explosions (FLI) not predicted by current theories. The influence of triggering was never explored for onset of DDT in explosives. As demonstrated in As new example in We consider an n = 20 source linear array to get an idea of possible impedance changes in a linear array. We compress and expand this array by varying Δd/λ. The corresponding source sizes remain fixed to kR = 0.1 and 1, respectively. Their individual impedances Re Z/ρc are 0.01 and 0.5. The impedances at a fixed locus of observation at the 10th source of the array are given in  One may speculate on the influence of the numbers of sources in an array where the constituents show low impedance. Calculations indicate that in this case the impedance increases little, even for very large source numbers. A bubble under normal conditions with kR ∼ 0.01 has an impedance of ~0.0001. An n = 10.000 bubble array with spacing Δd/λ = 0.0025 has an impedance of ~0.02. This might be the reason why even swarms of ‘normal’ bubbles behave benignly. Next we consider the question how the impedance varies under conditions of constant source size kR = 1, constant source spacing Δdλ= 0.05, but increasing number of sources (constant source configuration, increasing diameter). (n −1) Δd/λ = One may puzzle on the further interpretation of these results. It may be that the excess impedance characterizes such things as the von Neumann spike. Variation of the impedance with increasing diameter of the array may describe the geometry dependence (time dependence) of “steady” detonation. As known, proper explanation of DDT processes is a weak point of all plane-wave theories. Since the early approaches of Kistiakowski The reaction clusters are considered pressure sources in the theory presented here. Their radiative power increases with reaction rate, ambient pressure, and cooperative effects of an appropriate array of the reaction centers. An internal or external pressure rise transforms the ability of the bubbles to radiate pressure waves. Energy release occurs initially by flow, but energy partition shifts more and more to pressure-wave radiation, as “dynamics” and pressure increase. Under circumstances (Re Z/ρc > 1) the latter becomes larger than the energy of flow. There are many ways to alter the impedance of a single source and a source array: The size and impedance of a single source may be increased by ambient static pressure or an external pressure triggering. It is important to realize that this external pressure shock remains in amplitude much below the critical level of direct initiation. In chemically reactive systems this value is also altered by the motion of forced voids, induced by the rate of chemical decomposition. It is unlikely to stabilize a DDT process, as experience has shown. In this model we have further explained the triggering of vapor explosions or bubble resonance explosions of liquid gases and the transition from benign to hazardous two-phase flow, depending on the circumstances. Bubbly liquids and fluidized beds behave benignly under some conditions and dangerously under others. Chemical-energy release is favored when no other energy sources are present. In summary: DDT and the problems of the critical diameter are intimately linked. The existence of pressure precursors in detonation has been shown in Onset of High Velocity Detonation (HVD) in liquid explosives can occur as these bubbles powerfully expand into the low-pressure medium. This expanding bubble screen is a natural barrier to the oncoming original shock, leading to unique Hugoniot formulations, to regions of constant compression and compressibility under certain conditions. The shock is propagated by the expanding bubble screen so that the measured values of the particle velocity correspond to the (maximum) bubble expansion velocity. It is provocative to use such a basic view to explain complicated problems of detonation, such as the cell and herring-bone structure of detonation in gases and condensed explosives. Many scientists believe that shock-wave structures like those indicated by soot imprints would be associated only with (chemical) detonation events. But if one considers Antolik's The early observations of Campbell and Woodhead For example,   To observe structures of detonating condensed high explosives, various techniques have been applied. Howe, Frey, and Melani   Ignoring Antolik's results, complicated theoretical work has been done by many authors to calculate cell spacings in terms of reaction chemistry. A further problem is that the mechanism for generation of the soot imprints is not yet conclusively resolved. Mach stem interactions are discussed, but streaming velocities may also be considered. Within the scope of the microscopic detonation model with spherical sources, the reaction chemistry will be forced by the dissipative losses of bubble dynamics and motion, not by the usual thermal processes. Therefore, detonation structure is primarily governed by bubble dynamics and only indirectly by the resulting chemical reaction. To test this idea, the model of an expanding bubble ahead of the shock front is assumed without any further artificial assumptions. This void overtakes the shock velocity, and expands forward into the low-pressure medium (Chapters XVI and XVII) like a Rayleigh bubble (Chapters V and VI). It again is stopped in its motion by the follow-on pressure pulse. This is simplified to the model that the high-pressure bubble expands with constant velocity and then stops. Such a single source was described in Detonation is the result of a number n of cooperating pressure sources. Only sources in the area of observation are considered, whereby their properties are governed by the deep volume sources. The geometric situation in this area is sketched in The pressure p and radial particle velocity u Since the plane-wave particle velocity u The finite sources of radius R show acoustic quantities only at their surface, but not inside. Therefore, the path of the point of observation moves along the centerline of the circle, and on its source surface when a source is present (see The angles θ and φ are obtained as indicated in This situation is simulated in the following discussion by consideration of 13 identical rapidly expanding sources (described in  In  If bubble is collapsed as in the case of LVD, the results of  The detonation profiles shown in this Chapter are not stationary but move into the direction of the shock. There are unique model experiments by a two-dimensonal gel technique pioneered by Dear, Field and Walton A gel layer – made by dissolving 12 wt% gelatine in water at 330 K – finally is placed in a suitable shape between spaced glass blocks. A striker is shot by a gas gun onto this assembly, and the shock is monitored by a Schlieren technique. For details, see   