Atypical subtrochanteric femoral shaft fractures (AFFs) have recently emerged as a potential long-term complication of bisphosphonate therapy. In 2010, the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR) Task Force published a definition for AFF consisting of 5 major and 7 minor features. Little attention has so far been paid to the possibility that bisphosphonate-associated atypical fractures may also involve the diaphysis of other long bones. We report here the case of a patient on long-term bisphosphonate therapy who presented a diaphyseal tibial insufficiency fracture fulfilling all the major criteria (except for the location), and a number of the minor criteria of an atypical fracture. Our case report suggests the need for greater awareness of the possibility of atypical fractures at other sites, particularly in weight-bearing long bones other than the femur, and suggests that long-term bisphosphonate therapy may also contribute to the occurrence of these atypical fractures.Amino-bisphosphonates are the most commonly prescribed medication for the treatment of osteoporosis, and their efficacy in reducing fracture risk has been amply demonstrated A 77-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department with a 6-week history of pain over the left tibia since a mild trauma to the leg when she almost tripped and hit a supporting post of a banister when going down stairs. The pain intensified with weight bearing, and she had used a cane since the incident. She did not report falling or any other trauma. Her symptoms suddenly worsened while she was going down a flight of stairs. No weight bearing was possible afterwards. Her relevant medical history included COPD, osteoarthritis, and osteoporosis with multiple previous vertebral fractures. In 1969, following a car accident, a bone graft was needed at the L4–L5 level, and the left tibia was used as the donor site. The patient had quit smoking a few years previously. Current drug intake included Calcium 500 Bisphosphonates are the most common first-line therapy for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. Their efficacy in reducing both vertebral and non-vertebral fractures is well supported, and the safety profile is usually good We describe here a case of diaphyseal tibial fracture occurring in a postmenopausal woman who had been treated with zoledronic acid for 4 Insufficiency fractures related to bisphosphonate-induced suppression of bone turnover have previously been reported at sites other than the femoral diaphysis, including fractures of the pelvis, fibula, ankle, metatarsals, and long bones such as the humerus and tibia Bone remodeling is a physiological process required to maintain bone homeostasis and quality. Slowing down bone turnover clearly has beneficial effects, prolonging secondary mineralization which contributes to improved bone strength, as demonstrated by the reduction in fracture incidence In conclusion, atypical fractures usually affect the femur, but these fractures may also occur in other long bones, particularly weight-bearing bones like the tibial diaphysis. The occurrence of bone pain in any weight-bearing area in a patient taking long-term bisphosphonates should suggest a possible atypical fracture, and prompt investigation with plain radiographs, and even bone scintigraphy when the suspicion seems reasonable. A corollary of this is that the necessity for bisphosphonate treatment should be re-evaluated periodically depending on the patient's fracture risk. Drug holidays have been proposed by many bone experts