This work investigates the use of supercritical CO2, with organic acid solutions as cosolvents, for the recovery of neodymium (Nd) from the NdFeB permanent magnets of hard disk drives (HDDs). Atmospheric leaching experiments were performed at 90 °C, solid:liquid ratio of 1:20, and acid concentration of 1.0 M, using malic and citric acids. Extraction using supercritical CO2 was performed using different pressures, temperatures and extraction times. Leaching of the unroasted NdFeB powder at 90 °C resulted in Nd recoveries of 99.9% after 360 min using malic acid. With roasted NdFeB powder, low Nd recovery efficiencies of 21% and 32.1% after 900 min were obtained using malic and citric acid, respectively, at pressure of 1.01 bar and temperature of 90 °C. Extraction of the unroasted powder with supercritical CO2, at 90 °C and 120 bar, resulted in Nd recovery efficiencies of 99.4% and 50.5% after 30 min, using malic acid and citric acid, respectively. In the case of the roasted NdFeB powder, the efficiencies were 99.5% and 30.6% after 120 min using malic acid and citric acid, respectively, at 90 °C and 100 bar. The use of supercritical CO2 was highly effective for the recovery of Nd from the unroasted powder using malic acid, enabling a significant reduction of the extraction time from 360 min to 30 min. For the roasted NdFeB powder, it was possible to extract 99.5% of the Nd after 120 min using supercritical CO2 and malic acid, whereas the maximum recovery obtained with atmospheric leaching was 21.0% after 360 min.Neodymium is used in a wide range of electronic equipment components, including neodymium-iron-boron (NdFeB) permanent magnets employed in applications that require high energy and high coercive force [ The usage of NdFeB permanent magnets increased from 20 thousand tons in 2006 to 55 thousand tons in 2017 [ The extraction of rare earths from ores, as well as their recovery from secondary sources, is performed using mechanical, pyrometallurgical, and hydrometallurgical techniques [ The adaptation of hydrometallurgical processes to use organic acids is an environmentally safer alternative that generates easily degradable effluents and has the advantage of not emitting toxic gases to the atmosphere. Malic acid (C In addition to the conventional methods for the recovery of rare earths, such as the use of electrochemistry, ionic liquids, mechanochemistry, and organic acids [ In order for dissolution of metals to occur in supercritical CO This work investigates the use of supercritical CO The HDDs were collected at different technical assistance shops in the State of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, hence composing a heterogeneous sample. The HDDs were manually dismantled and the NdFeB magnets were removed. The HDDs were then reassembled and sent to electrical and electronic equipment recycling companies. The magnets were demagnetized at 350 °C for 30 min in a muffle furnace [ The milled NdFeB powder was separated into two portions, one of which was submitted to a roasting step in a muffle furnace at 900 °C for 480 min [ The compositions of the unroasted and roasted NdFeB powders were determined using X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (Model S8 Tiger, Bruker). Characterization of the phases present in the powders was performed using X-ray diffractometry (Miniflex 300, Rigaku). The total concentrations of neodymium in the NdFeB powders were determined by leaching with aqua regia (1 HNO Leaching at atmospheric pressure was performed in a three-necked flask that was immersed in water in a metal vessel for temperature control. The system was placed on a heating plate equipped with a magnetic stirrer operated at 800 rpm (Model Q261M23, Quimis). The flask was connected to a condenser supplied with water at 10 °C from an ultrathermostatic bath (Model MA184, Marconi), in order to avoid solvent loss by evaporation. The temperature of the system was measured using a thermometer inserted in one of the flask necks. Preliminary tests were carried out to determine the best conditions for atmospheric leaching, resulting in selection of a temperature of 90 °C, solid:liquid ratio of 1:20, and acid concentration of 1.0 M [ The selectivity towards Nd, relative to Fe, was calculated using Eq. The supercritical fluid extraction was performed using a reactor composed of 304 stainless steel with a Teflon lining and a jacket for temperature control. The internal volume of the reactor was 98 mL. The temperature of the reactor was regulated using an ultrathermostatic bath (Model Q214M2, Quimis). The CO A previously mixed sample of 3.0 g of NdFeB and 60 mL of 1.0 M citric or malic acid solution was inserted into the reactor. The system was operated as a static batch extraction, without any agitation. The leachate solutions were separated from the solids using the extraction valve at the reactor outlet. The reactor had a Teflon filter at the base that acted as a support for the material, retaining the solids when the reactor leachate was discharged. The leachate solution was also vacuum-filtered to avoid the presence of the solid phase. After the extraction, the CO In the experiments with supercritical CO Finally, in the fourth step, evaluation was made of the use of citric acid as the cosolvent, applying the best conditions found using malic acid. The metals present in the sample extract were quantified by analysis employing flame atomic absorption spectrometry (Model 240FS AA, Agilent). Neodymium was determined by flame emission [ The solubilities of the organic acid solutions in supercritical CO2 were measured in order to evaluate the influence of their solubilities on Nd recovery. Solubility (y) was determined as the ratio between the acid concentration in supercritical CO2 and the initial acid concentration of the aqueous phase, according to Eq. The experiments for solubility evaluation were performed in the high-pressure reactor ( The purpose of the roasting step was to transform the main elements present in the NdFeB magnets into their corresponding oxides, namely iron oxide (Fe The compositions of the roasted and unroasted NdFeB powders are shown in The Nd concentrations in the powders (with and without roasting) were considerably higher than found in the ores from which neodymium is originally extracted. The concentrations of Nd in the ores from major production mines vary from 12.0% of the rare earth content at Mountain Pass (USA) to 18.12% at Mount Weld (Australia), while a percentage of 16.6% is reported for the Bayan Obo mine (China) [ The X-ray diffractograms of the samples ( Quantification of Nd and Fe in the unroasted powder extracted using aqua regia resulted in concentrations of 310 and 585 mg per gram of NdFeB, respectively. The roasted NdFeB powder presented concentrations of 240 mg of Nd and 513 mg of Fe per gram of NdFeB powder. These concentrations were similar to those obtained using X-ray fluorescence and were used in the calculations of the leaching efficiencies for the extractions performed at atmospheric pressure and those using the supercritical fluid.  Leaching of the unroasted NdFeB powder using citric acid resulted in rapid removal of Nd, reaching about 86% after 30 min. Subsequently, the removal of Nd started to decrease and there was the formation of a thick sludge. The efficiency decreased to 30% after 120 min and then remained constant up to 180 min, when the experiment was ended, due to the high viscosity of the sludge formed. The recovery of Fe followed the behavior observed for Nd, with leaching of 99.9% after 30 min, followed by a decrease to 10% after 120 min. The pH of the solution was around pH 2.5 after 30 min, followed by a decrease to pH 1.5 after 120 min. The reaction of neodymium with citric acid can be described according to Eqs. Leaching of the roasted NdFeB powder with both malic acid and citric acid resulted in slow recovery of Nd, but with good selectivity relative to Fe. When malic acid was used, the Nd recovery efficiency reached 22% after 360 min, while the Fe recovery was 3%. The use of malic acid resulted in no further increase in recovery after 360 min. In the case of citric acid, the Nd recovery increased continuously from 18% to 32.1% between 60 and 900 min, while the Fe recovery remained almost constant at 2% as the leaching time increased. It was not considered practical to continue the leaching process for longer than 900 min, considering the small increase in Nd recovery and the continued energy consumption, which was contrary to the principles of an environmentally friendly process. The reactions of the neodymium and iron oxides with malic acid are shown in Eqs. It is important to note the difference between the pH values obtained for the unroasted and roasted powders using malic acid. The pH was close to 3.0 for the unroasted powder, while it was below 2.0 for the roasted powder. The decrease in pH was possibly related to the reaction kinetics, with lower consumption of H Although the recoveries were low, high selectivities towards Nd were obtained for the extractions of the roasted NdFeB powder, with values of 86% and 98% using malic acid and citric acid, respectively, while the values were almost zero in the case of the unroasted NdFeB powder. This selectivity could be explained by the lower solubility and greater stability of iron oxides, compared to rare earth oxides [ These results showed that it was possible to leach Nd using organic acids, with the kinetics being slower for the roasted NdFeB powder, compared to the unroasted powder, although the selectivity to Nd was higher when the roasted powder was used. Therefore, the use of the supercritical fluid was tested under the same operating conditions used in the atmospheric leaching, with the aim of reducing the time required for solubilization of Nd from the roasted and unroasted NdFeB powders. Malic acid was used in the tests to determine the best pressure conditions in the supercritical CO The results ( For the roasted NdFeB powder ( It is important to highlight that the minimum Nd recovery efficiency achieved for the roasted NdFeB powder was 35% using supercritical CO These results showed that the progressive increase of the pressure did not significantly increase the efficiency of the supercritical fluid extraction of Nd, under conditions distant from the critical point. Attaining the supercritical state results in increased solubility of rare earths and their oxides, as well as iron compounds, compared to leaching at atmospheric pressure [ In the subsequent experiments to evaluate the effect of temperature, pressures of 120 and 100 bar were defined for use with the unroasted and roasted NdFeB powders, respectively. The effect of temperature on the supercritical fluid extraction was evaluated using temperatures of 60, 70, 80, and 90 °C, while keeping constant the best pressures identified previously, as well as the other operating conditions. The results ( In supercritical extraction, under isobaric conditions, a higher temperature increases dissolution of the solute [ The best temperature of 90°C was selected in the subsequent experiments for the recovery of Nd from the roasted and unroasted NdFeB powders. Evaluation was made of the effect of extraction time on the Nd recovery efficiency obtained using malic acid and supercritical CO An important finding was that for the unroasted NdFeB powder, the extraction with supercritical CO The leaching of rare earth elements with malic acid involves multiphase reactions at the interface between the liquid and the solid, which are governed by the ion transfer rate [ The results demonstrated that the extraction of Nd using supercritical CO Evaluation was made of the effect of extraction time on the Nd recovery obtained using supercritical CO The solubility of citric acid in supercritical CO The difference between the results obtained using citric acid and malic acid showed that the effectiveness of the extraction with supercritical CO The solubility results obtained for the malic and citric acid solutions, at temperatures of 60 and 90 °C and pressures of 100 and 120 bar, indicated no effects of temperature or pressure on the solubilities of the organic acid solutions in supercritical CO Therefore, the results showed that effective recovery of Nd from discarded hard disk drives could be achieved using supercritical CO The use of organic acids in atmospheric pressure leaching and extraction with supercritical CO When the supercritical CO Efficient recovery of Nd (99.4%) was obtained after 30 min extraction of the unroasted NdFeB powder using supercritical CO The use of citric acid as cosolvent was less effective for Nd recovery from the unroasted and roasted NdFeB powders, with recoveries reaching 50.5% and 30.6%, respectively, and then remaining fairly constant. The selectivity achieved for extraction of the unroasted NdFeB powder with supercritical CO Despite the high recovery of Nd, Fe was still present in considerable quantity. Alternative methods could be used for selective Nd recovery leaving the Fe behind. These methods include solvent extraction, ion exchange, and precipitation. Therefore, it could be concluded that the use of supercritical CO None. The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the following Brazilian agencies: