A simple process to produce fine and low soda α-alumina (α-Al2O3) from a commercial grade aluminium trihydroxide (gibbsite, Al(OH)3) produced by KC Corporation Ltd was developed. There are two options for this process with the first one producing low soda α-alumina (<0.05% Na2O) having a mean particle size of 50 μm. The second option yields a fine product with a mean size of less than 10 μm. In the first option, a plant aluminium trihydroxide containing 0.20% Na2O was first fluidized with nitrogen at 400–600 °C to yield an amorphous activated alumina. This intermediate product was then treated with acetic or oxalic acid, washed with water and heated to 1200 °C to form calcined α-alumina, having a Na2O content of less than 0.05%. A 20 min leaching using 0.2 M acetic or oxalic acid could yield an alumina product containing 0.04% Na2O. In the second option, a new technique for the preparation of fine and low soda α-alumina was evaluated using an attrition mill working also as a leaching vessel at 80 °C. Fine (<10 μm in mean particle size) and low soda (<0.04% Na2O) alumina was produced by a 20 min leaching step with 0.2 M acetic acid and concurrent attrition milling.Fine and low soda alumina has been used in many industrial applications. This material is the feed for the production of alumina ceramic and other refractory products, which have been used in a wide range of engineering fields due to their excellent chemical stability, electrical and mechanical properties. Commercial grade “fine and low soda α-alumina” has a mean particle size (D Alumina (Al Fine-grained alumina can be produced during calcination by seeding a Bayer aluminium trihydroxide with fine α-alumina (α-Al Various methods have been proposed to produce fine and low soda α-alumina from Bayer aluminium trioxide. At the ever increasing demand for fine and low soda α-alumina it is therefore necessary to install a simple yet effective process in existing Bayer plants to treat aluminium trihydroxide (gibbsite) produced within these plants. Soda can easily be removed by acid washing as long as it is exposed and not trapped within the aluminium hydroxide structure during precipitation. Organic acids have advantages over other inorganic counterparts as they can be completely destroyed to form carbon dioxide during alumina calcination, thus leaving no trace of contamination in the final product. Fine grinding could be applied if the gibbsite agglomerates (aluminium trihydroxide from precipitation) can be transformed into a less rigid structure. This study was conducted to evaluate a technique which can be easily scaled up in Bayer alumina plants to produce low soda α-alumina. The technique is based on the treatment of activated alumina (formed from calcination of the aluminium hydroxide feed) by acetic and oxalic acid to remove the soda. An attrition mill working as a leaching vessel was also used to grind the activated alumina in acetic acid to produce the fine and low soda product for the study. All chemicals and reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. All solutions were prepared using distilled water. The aluminium trihydroxide used in the experiment was from Korean Chemicals Corporation's alumina refinery which contains 99.7% Al(OH) The preparation of fine low soda alumina was carried out using an attrition mill (KMD-1B, Korea). The product particle size distribution was checked with a particle size analyzer (Fritsch, Analysette 22). An X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (PW 2400, Netherlands) was used to determine the soda content in alumina. X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) was performed using a diffractometer employing Cu The soda leaching experiments were carried out using a three-necked, round-bottom 1 L flask equipped with a mechanical stirrer set at 250 rpm and a condenser. The reactor was immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath to maintain a constant test temperature in the range from 25 to 100 °C. In each experiment, a weighed amount of 250 g of activated alumina was suspended in 250 mL of an acid solution. The acid-treated material was then washed with distilled water (250 mL) and then centrifuged using a centrifugal separator to remove the excess organic acid. In a second series of tests, soda leaching and attrition milling were simultaneously conducted using a special attrition mill (1 L capacity, Model: KMD-1B, Korea) working also as a leaching vessel. The attrition mill was first charged with 250 g of activated alumina, 250 mL of 0.1–0.7 M organic acid and zirconia balls (3 mm diameter) added at 30% mill volume. The attrition mill was also jacketed with hot water to heat the mill compartment to 80 °C. The leached product was then calcined at 1200 °C to make calcined alumina (α-alumina). The soda which is captured within the crystal structure of aluminium trihydrate is very difficult to be removed by washing. Therefore, the key to make low soda alumina in this study was to convert the aluminium trihydroxide feed material to activated alumina to open its grain structure and thus exposing the soda to leaching solutions. Numerous methods were employed by researchers to produce activated alumina in a laboratory including mechano-chemical activation (  The high specific surface area of the activated alumina intermediate could be due to the more cracks formed in the micro-structure of the activated material ( The crystal structure of gibbsite (Al(OH) The calcination temperature of 500 °C was chosen in this study to produce the mostly activated alumina for the subsequent acid leaching. As shown in the XRD pattern, although some boehmite phase still existed at this temperature and the dehydration of the alumina trihydroxide feed was not completed, the surface area measurements ( Most commercial low soda α-alumina products contain > Soda in the activated alumina reacts with organic acids according to Eqs. It is noted that the stoichiometry of the reaction is different for oxalic acid (2 mol oxalic acid is required to remove 1 mol of caustic NaOH) compared to the leaching using acetic acid (1:1 molar stoichiometry). However the stronger ionization (higher values of ionization The leaching of the plant aluminium trihydroxide by 1 M organic acids at 80 °C over 60 min showed a 50% decrease in the soda level as shown in On the other hand, the leaching of activated alumina (activated to 500 °C) using 0.2 M acetic or oxalic acid could reduce the soda content of the calcined product (calcined to 1200 °C, α-alumina) to below 0.04% as shown in The effect of temperature is shown in The acid concentration also affects the removal of soda from activated alumina. The variation of soda in the calcined alumina product with respect to acid concentration is shown in A jacketed attrition mill was used to produce fine and low soda alumina product in this study. Activated alumina produced at 500 °C (50% pulp density), organic acid (0.2 M) and zirconia balls (3 mm diameter) were fed into this attrition mill heated to 80 °C. The milling at this test temperature in acid was conducted over 20 min and the acid-treated activated alumina was filtered, dried and calcined at 1200 °C to produce the final fine and low soda α-alumina product.  Leaching soda and grinding activated alumina simultaneously was carried out at 80 °C over 20 min for both acids. The soda removal process is summarized as a flowsheet presented in The prices of chemical grade aluminium hydroxide and calcined alumina are approximately $US300/tonne and $US500/tonne, respectively, on the market. Low soda α-alumina demands a much higher price at $US750–900/tonne for D To produce low soda alumina (under 0.04% Na