Injectable bioactive acrylic formulations based on poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and different amounts of bioactive glasses in the system SiO2–CaO–Na2O–P2O5 have been prepared in the presence of the anti-inflammatory analgesic drug fosfosal, the sodium salt of 2-phosphonoxibenzoic acid, to be used in minimally invasive surgery. The injectability of the formulations evaluated according to the established protocol was around 80%. The experimental formulations provided maximum temperatures in the range 50–60°C, which were lower than those of commercial acrylic bone cements currently used in percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP). Residual monomer content of any formulation was inferior to 5%. Compressive yield strength of dry specimens was in the range 80–95MPa, but it decreased after immersion in SBF to values in the range 30–50MPa, due to the dissolution of the bioactive glasses and the drug in the medium. The release of fosfosal was evaluated in vitro (pH=7.0). The release profile against time obtained from a PMMA cement was quasi-linear and the 80% of the initial amount of drug was released in 175h. However, for bioactive cements, the 80–100% of the fosfosal charged was released in approximately 48h, due to the dissolution of the glasses in the medium. Values of weight loss of the cements determined gravimetrically ranged between 16% and 26% depending on the initial amount of fosfosal, i.e. 20 or 30wt%, respectively. The weight loss and the water uptake were simultaneous processes, and values of hydration degree were around 10–14%. The formation of an apatite-like layer was detected on the surface of the cements at different periods of time depending on the composition of the bioactive glasses. The cements containing the glasses with P2O5 produced the growth of the apatite layer in shorter periods of time. The presence of fosfosal accelerated the precipitation of this layer independently on the glasses. The in vivo biocompatibility studied by intramuscular implantation in rats showed the absence of an anti-inflammatory response and a fibrous layer around the implant for the cement prepared with PMMA/fosfosal which is attributed to the therapeutic action of fosfosal acting in situ. The response to cements prepared with bioactive glasses and fosfosal showed a mild inflammatory reaction with the formation of the typical fibrous capsule around the implanted material.Injectable materials for treating vertebral body fractures or stabilizing osteoporosis defects are demanded to be used in minimally invasive orthopaedic procedures such as percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP). This technique was introduced a decade ago in France by Galibert and Deramond In this paper, we report the formulation of injectable bioactive acrylic bone cements based on PMMA and different amounts of bioactive glass in the system SiO The cements were prepared at room temperature and injectability was evaluated according to the protocol established. Curing parameters were obtained from the polymerization exotherms. The characterization of the cements was assessed by determining residual monomer content (RMC), glass transition temperature and mechanical properties. Fosfosal release was evaluated in vitro and the behaviour of the cements was studied through the evolution of the surface by microscopic and spectroscopic techniques. Finally, the biocompatibility of the formulations was evaluated in vivo by intramuscular implantation in rats and intraosseous implantation in rabbits. PMMA beads (33 The sol–gel bioactive glasses were prepared as follows: Appropriate amounts of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), NaNO The particle size distribution was determined by laser ray scattering using a Microtrac SRA-150 The bioactive bone cements were formulated using a solid:liquid ratio of 1.7:1. The liquid component consisted of MMA monomer, and DMOH (1 Solid and liquid components of the cements were conditioned for 2 The exothermic polymerization temperature profile was registered automatically at 25°C using a thermocouple connected to a high sensitivity thermotester and positioned within its junction in the centre of a cylindrical Teflon mould at a height of 3 Residual monomer was determined by means of Glass transition temperatures ( Mechanical properties of cured cements were evaluated in compression at room temperature using an Instron 4301 testing machine. A load cell of 5 Rectangular shaped samples of 30 Discs of 15 The morphology of the surface of samples after immersion in SBF was examined by environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM), using a Philips XL 30 microscope and by scanning electron microscopy (SEM-EDS) with a Philips XL 30 connected to a microanalyser of X-ray EDAX DX-4. The composition of the surface was analysed by ATR-FTIR spectroscopy (Perking Elmer Spectrum One) and by X-ray diffraction with a Philips-MRD diffractometer using CuK Intramuscular implantation of rods of cured cement (3 Intraosseous implantation was studied in New Zealand rabbits of average weight 3.820 The femoral condyle was cut longitudinally and then was included in methacrylate Acrylic bone cements incorporating bioactive glass and the drug fosfosal have been specifically formulated for use in percutaneous minimal invasive vertebroplasty. Two types of glasses were prepared to that end, BVSP and BVCP, whose nominal composition is shown in The exotherms of polymerization of the experimental formulations were measured at 25°C and values of the curing parameters are summarized in Vertebral percutaneous puncture is performed using needles of different lengths and diameters depending on the vertebral level Cured cements were characterised measuring the RMC and the flexibility of chain by means of the determination of the glass transition temperature ( Among the mechanical properties to be considered in orthopaedics, compressive properties are the most relevant for replacement of cancellous bone whereas tensile properties are important for cortical bone The release profiles of fosfosal in phosphate buffer of pH=7.0 are plotted against time in In vitro behaviour of the drug-loaded bioactive cements was studied in SBF. Results of hydration degree and weight loss for the cements formulated with BVCP or BVSP glass are shown in The formation of an apatite-like layer on the surface of the drug-loaded bioactive cements was confirmed by experimental techniques such as ATR-FTIR, XRD, ESEM.  Formulations prepared with the BVCP glass but in absence of fosfosal presented morphological changes in shorter periods of time compared with those observed in cements containing BVSP. The cement BVCP-40 showed depositions of hydroxyapatite after 10 days of immersion, and the cement BVCP-60 after 4 days, which indicates that the presence of P The biocompatibility of the cured cements was first studied by intramuscular implantation of rods in rats. The histological response to the formulations prepared with bioactive glass and fosfosal was independent on the type of glass, and, as an example, in Secondly, in vivo experiments were carried out by intraosseous implantation of the cement BVSP-40-FS-30 in the femur of rabbits. Fosfosal-loaded bioactive acrylic bone cements can be used as injectable formulations for minimally invasive vertebroplasty, PVP. These formulations have some advantages with respect to PMMA. From a biological point of view, they have maximum temperatures 20°C inferior to those of plain PMMA. They provide initial mechanical support followed by a lowering of properties in the first 15 days and a stabilization with values of elastic modulus and compressive strength higher than those of cancellous bone. The in situ release of fosfosal can be appropriate to counteract the inflammatory response associated to the cement implantation. These cements developed the precipitation of an apatite-like layer in vitro Financial support from the