The dewetting kinetics between a small air–liquid interface and a silica (negatively charged in water) planar surface in solutions of dodecylammonium chloride (cationic surfactant) has been investigated using the Scheludko cell and digital high-speed video microscopy. The gas–liquid interface was created at the bottom of a small silica capillary of the cell and then was moved towards the silica planar surface. After the rupture of the liquid films between the interfaces, the expansion of the gas–liquid–solid three-phase contact (TPC) line was observed and recorded using a digital high-speed video microscope system, operating at 1000 frames/s. The surface tension of the surfactant solution was measured using the pendant drop technique. The equilibrium contact angle was measured using the Scheludko–Minings method with a silica micro-sphere. The TPC radius was determined as a function of time and compared against the available hydrodynamic and molecular-kinetic models. The experimental data are described very well by the molecular-kinetic model for the TPC line motion. The hydrodynamic model is in agreement with the experimental data only for a short time after inception of the three-phase contact expansion. A simplified model was developed for predicting the time of the TPC line expansion in flotation.The expansion of the three-phase contact line between an air bubble and a solid surface is vitally important for a number of practical applications, such as froth flotation used in the recovery of coal, minerals, paper fibres in the recycling of wastepaper, and in the removal of bacteria, organic contaminants and fine solid particles in wastewater treatment. For the attachment of the solid particle to the air bubble in flotation within a very short time, two consecutive processes should successfully take place ( Thinning and rupture of the thin film between the particle and the bubble surface, and Expansion of the gas–liquid–solid three-phase contact (TPC) perimeter to provide a sufficiently large contact area with a strong attachment force. Summing up the times of the thin film drainage and rupture, and the TPC line expansion gives the attachment (induction) time ( Further details of the role of the film rupture and TPC expansion rate in the flotation elementary act may be found in the treatise by A detailed investigation of the movement of the TPC line relevant to flotation processes has recently been conducted by Nguyen et al. ( Recently, the motion of the TPC lines has been investigated, using a small rising bubble which ruptured against a horizontal glass plate ( The aim of the present paper is to extend our study of the TPC expansion rate to surfactant solutions. The TPC line expansion rate is expected to be strongly affected by the presence of surfactant molecules in the liquid phase. In dilute solutions, during the TPC expansion the transfer of surfactant molecules from the vapour–solution interface to the solid–solid interface takes place. This mass transfer process would affect the dewetting process. In the present work we report experimental results on the expansion of TPC contact between a small air bubble and a flat silica substrate in a solution of DDA surfactant, using an experimental technique based on the microscope method developed by Dodecylammonium chloride (99%, DDA) purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (Sydney, Australia) was used in the present study without further purification. Sodium chloride (analytical grade) from Merck was heated for 90 The planar, optically polished silica plate and silica spheres in the size range 160–200 The Scheludko cell ( The Scheludko cell, and the silica plate and spheres were cleaned before each experiment with hot sodium oleate, with hot bichromate mixture, and then were washed repeatedly with Milli-Q water, following the procedure described in The expansion of the TPC perimeter was monitored by means of an inverted microscope (Nikon, Japan), and recorded by an attached high-speed CCD digital camera system (Phantom 5, Research Vision, USA), using the method developed by The images of the instantaneous patterns of the three-phase contact lines were recorded at an image frequency of 1000 pictures/s. The TPC line radii were determined from the images using Image Analysis Software Phantom 586 developed by the supplier of the high-speed camera system (Research Vision, USA). The transient TPC areas were measured and used to determine the TPC radius as a function of time. The equilibrium TPC angle was measured with a microscope technique using the modified Mingins–Scheludko method ( The theoretical analysis aims to predict the TPC radius, If the hemi-spherical bubbles are used during the experiments, Eqs. The radial position of the three-phase contact line was measured as a function of time at neutral pH and constant ionic strength (0.2) at the following concentrations of DDA: 1 The experimental values of the surface tension and the equilibrium contact angle measured with the micro-spheres are shown in The dewetting experimental data are also compared to the theoretical predictions described by both the hydrodynamic and molecular-kinetic theories for the three-phase contact line motion. The dashed line shown in the graphs describes the best fit of the hydrodynamic model prediction described by Eqs. Values of ln( The hydrodynamic model fits well with the experimental data only in the early stages of spreading, at 10 The experimental data for the TPC radius versus time are also compared to the molecular-kinetic model predictions, as shown in The least-square regression analysis gives the best-fit values for the model parameters: The geometry for the expansion of the TPC line between a particle and a bubble in flotation is shown in Eqs. The particle polar position, The expansion of the TPC line was determined for aqueous films of DDA on the silica surface. The expansion rate of the TPC lines increases with the DDA concentration. The hydrodynamic model follows the experimental data only in the initial stages of the three-phase contact line expansion. The experimental data are described very well by the molecular-kinetic model. The values for the model parameters obtained seem reasonable and physically consistent. Thus, The authors gratefully acknowledge the Research Management Committee of the University of Newcastle for a Visitor Grant to support the visit of Dr Lidia Alexandrova to Newcastle, the Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes of the Australian Research Council for financial support and hospitality, Mr Chi M. Phan for assistance with the surface tension measurements and Dr Ron Roberts for technical assistance.