Adsorption of sulfide collectors such as xanthate on pyrite has been studied extensively over several decades using a wide variety of techniques. In spite of this, there are unanswered questions as to the identity of adsorbed species on pyrite surfaces—dixanthogen vs. iron xanthate complexes. Far less is known in non-xanthate collector systems. We have used Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS) successfully in the past to obtain direct evidence for the identity of the adsorbed collector species on copper sulfides, galena and Cu-activated quartz. The present study is an extension of the SIMS analysis to investigate the adsorption of xanthate, dithiophosphate, dithiocarbamate, and modified thionocarbamates and thioureas on pyrite. Adsorption of these collectors on chalcocite was also studied for comparison. An attempt was also made to obtain SIMS spectra for pure dixanthogens at room temperature.
                  The collector molecular ion was detected for pure amyl dixanthogen, but only dixanthogen fragments were observed for the isobutyl and ethyl homologues. Only in the case of dithiocarbamate (DTC) was there direct evidence for the presence of not only the collector dimer, but also iron–DTC complexes. On chalcocite, only the copper–DTC complexes were detected (no dimer). In the case of xanthate, the collector molecular ion and its S adduct—which are possible fragments from dixanthogen—were detected on pyrite, along with a fragment peak suggesting Fe2X. For dithiophosphate, the collector molecular ion and Fe(DTP)(OH) complex were detected (no dimer). For modified thionocarbamate and thiourea, adsorption on pyrite was negligible. SIMS results obtained in this study imply that one cannot subscribe only to collector dimers as the predominant species on pyrite under practical flotation conditions and rule out the formation of Fe-collector complexes for the adsorption of collectors on pyrite.Adsorption of xanthates on pyrite has been the subject of extensive investigation in the last 50 years or so; other collectors have received relatively little attention. The general consensus appears to be that, whereas xanthates adsorb on copper sulfides and galena via the formation of the metal xanthate, adsorption on pyrite is largely via dixanthogen formation Despite the considerable amount of work conducted in this area, much of the evidence for the identity of the adsorbed collector species has been indirect at best, especially under conditions of direct relevance to flotation. Evidence for the identity of surface species comes mainly from FTIR, XPS and electrochemical measurements. In principle, FTIR is ideally suited for the identification of surface species because it can be performed in situ. One of the major problems is the lack of sensitivity, especially at the low collector concentrations employed in flotation. This technique is also quite difficult when particulates are involved. Spectral interpretation is often tenuous because of complex band shifts and interference. Vacuum techniques such as XPS have been somewhat successful A technique such as Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS) may provide a more convincing evidence for the identity of the surface species after collector adsorption, especially when the molecular ion of the surface species can be detected. Detection of such a species requires very high sensitivity and SIMS, under certain conditions, has the required sensitivity. Although XPS has been used widely for the study of mineral–collector interactions, SIMS is a relatively new technique in this application as evidenced by the limited published literature The adsorption of sulfide collectors on chalcopyrite, chalcocite, galena and copper activated quartz was reexamined recently using SIMS High grade (>95% purity) pyrite and chalcocite were obtained from Wards Natural Science. These minerals were hand crushed and freshly dry (or wet) ground, just prior to use, in an agate mortar to obtain particles in the size range of 75–150 μm. The collectors used in this study are listed in In addition to the above collectors, pure dixanthogens of ethyl, isobutyl and amyl xanthates were prepared using standard literature method Pyrite and chalcocite: approximately 1 g of the freshly dry ground mineral was conditioned with 100 ml of 10 SIMS spectra and images were obtained using a Charles Evans & Associates Time of Flight (ToF) SIMS Spectrometer using 15 keV SIMS spectra of dixanthogens were obtained at room temperature (no cold stage) by applying a thin coating of these dixanthogens onto a silica surface. The SIMS results obtained for pyrite will be the main focus of this paper. Results for chalcocite will be discussed when appropriate, and the discussion will be limited to comparison purposes only. The major findings of SIMS analysis of pyrite surfaces are summarized in Only the diamyl dixanthogen (molecular mass 326) produced a molecular ion peak, albeit weak, at 325 Da, in addition to dixanthogen fragments at 163 corresponding to amyl xanthate and at 195 corresponding to C The results of SIMS analysis (at room temperature) of pyrite surfaces treated with isobutyl and amyl xanthates and diisobutyl dithiophosphate are summarized in The fact that the xanthate or the dithiophosphate molecular ions were detected on pyrite immediately poses the question: in what form does the xanthate or dithiophosphate exist on pyrite? Three possibilities exist: chemisorbed collector, iron–collector complex(es), and collector dimer. No distinction is made here between species that are bound strongly to the mineral and those physisorbed on the surface. It must also be noted that the pyrite sample after collector treatment was washed with borate-buffered water before drying, and it is not known whether this washing removes any physisorbed species. With the available SIMS data (see below), none of the three possible species mentioned above can be ruled out. The vacuum conditions in the SIMS instrument are the same as those in an XPS instrument. If collector dimer was indeed the sole species and it was “pumped off” In the limited amount of SIMS work conducted so far for xanthate adsorption on pyrite, the molecular ion for diamyl dixanthogen was not detected In the case of dithiophosphate also In the case of neutral collector molecules, such as IBECTC and NBECTU, adsorption on pyrite was negligible under the conditions used in this study. This is consistent with the high selectivity against pyrite observed in flotation practice with these collectors  In the case of chalcocite, no dimer was observed for DBDTC. Instead, a complex spectrum containing peaks for Cu–DTC complexes with different metal:ligand ratio was observed. Thus, peaks were evident for the molecular ion at 204, 1:1 Cu(DTC) complex at 268, 1:2 Cu(DTC) In view of the fact that dimer as well as Fe–DTC complexes were observed on pyrite for DTC, and that only the Cu–collector complexes were observed for chalcocite, and with the available SIMS data for xanthate on pyrite, one cannot confidently argue in favor of either dixanthogen or the Fe–xanthate complex as the sole species on pyrite (and similarly for dithiophosphate). It is possible that both dixanthogen and Fe–xanthate complex are formed on pyrite. From the point of view of coordination chemistry, there is no reason why an Fe–xanthate complex cannot be formed. Small amounts of Cu and Pb have also been detected by SIMS on pyrite samples used in the present study despite the fact that the sample was hand-picked and of a very high grade from Wards. It is possible that the high sensitivity of SIMS is the reason for the detection of Cu and Pb impurities, which may not be readily detected in other techniques. There is bound to be a contribution from these impurities to collector adsorption on pyrite. It is likely that the concentration of such impurities would be much higher in run-of-the-mill ore samples in flotation plants, and a simplistic view of collectors interacting with “pure” pyrite may lead to misleading and conflicting observations in practice. The adsorption of several sulfide collectors on pyrite was studied using Secondary Ion Mass Spectroscopy (SIMS) in order to identify the surface collector species. The collectors studied were In the case of pure dixanthogens, the dixanthogen molecular ion was observed only for diamyl dixanthogen along with its important and diagnostic fragments, viz. amyl xanthate and C For xanthates and dithiophosphate, collector molecular ion was readily detected, but not that of collector dimer. There were fragments, however, that could be attributed to both collector dimer and iron–collector complexes. Thus, for xanthate C For the neutral collector molecules NBECTU and IBECTC, which are known selective collectors, adsorption on pyrite was found to be negligible. In the case of dithiocarbamates, collector dimer as well as Fe–DTC complexes were detected on pyrite, whereas only the Cu–DTC complexes were detected on chalcocite. On both minerals, SIMS spectra were complex, suggesting that adsorption may not involve simple, single surface species. In view of these results, one cannot subscribe only to collector dimers as the predominant species on pyrite and rule out the formation of Fe–collector complexes for the adsorption of collectors on pyrite.