Bentonitic clays are largely composed of the mineral montmorillonite. Today, bentonites are used in different branches of industry, such as in drilling fluids, dyes, Pharmaceuticals, paper, cement, nanocomposites, polymer composites and ceramics. Bentonite dispersions are widely used in industrial processes because of their exceptional rheological behavior. In this work, the rheological behavior of three types of bentonites with different Na+/Ca+2 ratios was investigated. The bentonite dispersions showed Newtonian, Bingham plastic and shear thinning behaviors depending on the solid concentration and bentonite type. Although, all bentonite dispersion exhibited a thixotropic behavior, the Na-bentonite showed a greater degree of thixotropy which was two order of magnitudes greater than that of Ca-bentonite. The rheological behavior of bentonite suspensions developed significantly in the first 24h of preparation. The addition of electrolytes in a concentration range of 0.02–0.2M reduced the apparent viscosity of the bentonite suspensions and changed its rheological behavior from shear thinning to Newtonian and shear thickening. The divalent cation salts experienced more reduction in the apparent viscosity and yield stress of suspension than the monovalent cation salts.Bentonite is a type of clay consisting mainly of a hydrous silicate of aluminum; its color varies from gray to brown. Bentonites have formed by weathering of volcanic tuff and ash and consist mainly of montmorillonite [(Al,Mg) Today, bentonites are used in different branches of industry, such as in drilling fluids ( Bentonite suspensions are widely used in industrial processes because of their exceptional rheological properties. The rheological behavior of bentonite dispersions depends on different factors, including the type and concentration of bentonite, the size and shape of bentonite particles, the electrostatic properties of the bentonite particles, the exchangeable ions, and the concentration of the electrolytes in dispersions ( The rheological measurements of bentonite dispersions, an important route to revealing the flow and deformation behaviors of materials, cannot only improve the formulation process of commercial products but can also be very important in design and process evaluation, quality control, and storage stability. Finally all of these factors can significantly affect the final properties of the product and economic aspects of the process ( Different additives have been used in bentonite dispersions to control the rheological behavior of the dispersions that meet the specification of the desired applications, such as electrolytes ( In this study, the rheological properties of three different types of bentonite dispersions with different Na Three different types of bentonite clays were used in this study. Bentonite 1 (B1) is a lab grade sample supplied by Sigma-Aldrich Company Ltd.,Germany. Bentonite 2 (B2) and bentonite 3 (B3) are commercial samples which are used by the oil companies in UAE. Bentonite 2 (B2) is OCMA specifications and produced by Abu-Dhabi Drilling Chemicals and Products, UAE. Bentonite 3 (B3) is produced by MilPark Drilling Fluids, USA, with the commercial name of MIL-BEN API BENTONITE. The chemical analysis of these bentonites is shown in Electrolytes BaCl Rheological properties of prepared suspensions were measured with a RheolabQC viscometer from Anton Paar, Germany. The concentric cylinder measuring system used is according to ISO 3219 and DIN 53019 standards. The shear stress ( Bentonite suspensions were prepared in different concentrations ranged from 0.5  The Herschel–Bulkley (H–B) model was used to describe the rheological behavior of bentonite suspensions: The effects of solid concentration on the flow curves of bentonite dispersions were quantified using the H–B model, which fitted well the The presence of the yield stress in bentonite suspensions is due to the resistance solid particles show against deformation, until the applied stress exceeds the yield strength of the solid phase and the suspension likes a show flow. It is commonly admitted that the yield stress of suspensions is linked to the existence of an interconnected three dimensional network of flocs ( For low solid concentration the flow behavior of bentonite dispersion can be controlled by the Newtonian viscosity. In the medium solid concentration range, the flow properties of bentonite dispersion can be controlled by the yield stress at low shear rates and by Bingham viscosity at high shear rates. On the other hand, the consistency coefficient and yield stress both control the flow behavior of high concentration bentonite dispersion at low shear conditions, while it will be solely controlled by the flow behavior index at high shear conditions. Thixotropy, which is a decrease in the apparent viscosity with time under constant shearing, followed by a gradual recovery when the shear is removed, has been detected in many clay suspensions ( In this work, it was found that B1 exhibits the greatest thixotropic behavior and that B3 exhibits the minimum thixotropic behavior. In  The effect of aging time on the thixotropy of the bentonite suspensions is presented in Chemical additives such as electrolytes, polymers, surface active agents, etc. when included in a water–clay system, interact with clay particles and change the rheological properties. In fact, surface modification of clay minerals has become increasingly important in the optimization of the practical application of clays. In the present study, the rheological behavior of bentonite dispersions in different types of electrolyte solutions at different concentrations; 0.02–0.20 The rheological behavior of 8 On the other hand, the addition of monovalent electrolytes; NaCl Bentonite–water suspension was found to exhibit non-Newtonian behavior starting from 4.0 It has been found that the apparent viscosity of the bentonite suspension increases with aging time. However, the development of the suspension structure is found to be relatively limited after 24 This work was financially supported by the