Selective dissolved-air flotation for the separation of medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) inclusion bodies (IBs) from Pseudomonas putida cell debris is investigated. Measurements show that both P. putida cell debris and PHA IBs have an iso-electric point of approximately pH 3.5. Selective aggregation and as a result selective flotation of PHA IBs was observed near this pH. Qualitative prediction of the aggregation behaviour was possible on the basis of the Van der Waals, hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. In some cases however, the stability of the suspension could not be explained with these forces alone. It was therefore suggested that additional interactions, such as steric/brush effects, play an important role in the aggregation process.Separation of particles (0.05–100 μm) from biotechnological mixtures of particles, such as inclusion bodies, cell debris, virus-like particles and crystals, is gaining interest from industry because of the increasing number of production processes that yield a particulate product in a mixture with other particles. In these processes product particles are formed because of supersaturation of the liquid phase with the compound of interest, improper folding of intracellular compounds, or as the result of a storage mechanism within a microorganism. There are two strategies for product purification when dealing with particulate products in particle mixtures. First of all, the particulate product can be separated from the other particles by particle–particle separation, e.g., centrifugation and filtration. A second possibility is solubilisation followed by selective recrystallisation or extraction of the product. When the product-containing particles already have a high purity, selective particle recovery by particle–particle separation has an advantage over the latter method because it reduces the number of operations for product purification. In addition, extraction with organic solvents can cause irreversible product degradation, as is observed during the extraction of polyhydroxyalkanoates from biomass Currently, centrifugation and filtration are the main particle–particle separation techniques that are applied in biotechnology. Filtration is by no means ideal for bioparticle separation because the particle size distributions of the product particles and other particles overlap in most cases. Centrifugation, on the other hand, can deal with overlapping size distributions if the differences in settling velocities in the centrifuge are large enough. However, most bioparticle mixtures contain small particles (0.05–100 μm) with densities (900–1540 kg/m Particles can adsorb to gas–liquid and liquid–liquid interfaces. This phenomenon can be used for particle–particle separation when the adsorption process is selective for one type of particle in a particle mixture. In biotechnology this technique has been applied for the recovery of particulate products in very few cases. Andrews et al. In all of the above-mentioned examples, liquid–liquid interfaces were used for particle–particle separation. There is an advantage of using gas–liquid interfaces, however. Regeneration of the two fluid phases is easier with these systems because dissolved biomolecules that are present in the particle suspension will not partition to the gas phase as a result of their low volatility at moderate temperatures, while in liquid–liquid systems partitioning will occur. More importantly, in liquid–liquid systems the particulate product will partly dissolve in the second liquid phase that is introduced, which causes product loss or requires an extensive recovery process. Air flotation of particles has been applied in biotechnology only for the separation of whole cells from the fermentation medium. Known works deal with the relation between contact angle and cell adhesion to an air–water interface In this work, the application of selective flotation for separation of medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) inclusion bodies (IBs) from enzyme-treated Flotation is controlled by the complex interplay of particle–particle interactions, particle–bubble interactions and hydrodynamics leading through collisions to (mixed) aggregates. Particle properties, such as particle size, hydrophobicity and surface charge (or zeta-potential) thus play an important role. For this reason, the zeta-potentials of the PHA IBs and The performance of a flotation process is often expressed by a flotation rate constant that is the first order rate constant, In literature, the flotation process is generally described using three sub-processes In the following Sections ( The collision efficiency between particles and bubbles is strongly related to the hydrodynamics around the air bubbles in the flotation device. It can be described with different interception collision models for different ranges of particle and bubble sizes and different flow conditions (mobile or rigid bubble surface). In biological systems surfactants, such as proteins and lipids, are often present. These compounds adsorb onto the bubble surface, which becomes rigid when the pressure resulting from the surface tension gradient along the surface counterbalances or exceeds the Laplace pressure. It is expected that this is the case in most biological systems due to the high concentration of surface-active compounds. Yoon and Luttrell Eq. When a particle and bubble collide, they are at first separated by a liquid film. This liquid film needs to be drained for particle–bubble attachment to take place. Liquid film thinning requires a net force that causes particle motion in the direction of the bubble. The attachment process therefore depends on hydrodynamics and interaction forces, such as Van der Waals interaction, electrostatic interaction and hydrophobic interaction that are discussed in the following sections. The Van der Waals force can be described with the following equation The electrical double layers of charged objects overlap when the distance between their surfaces is in the order of the Debye decay length Rabinovich and Yoon Yoon and Mao The selective flotation process becomes more efficient when the difference in flotation rate constants of the different particles is increased. The selectivity of the process can be defined according The flotation rate constant can be controlled by manipulating surface properties of the particles and/or their effective particle size. The latter can be increased through aggregation, which causes the flotation rate to increase (Eq. Aggregation may occur between identical particles (desired) or between non-identical particles (undesired in most cases). Eq. In this work the influence of pH and ionic strength (aluminum chloride) is investigated. Addition of aluminum chloride causes compression of the electrical double layer but can also result in specific adsorption of its cationic multivalent ionic species onto negatively charged surfaces. The latter process may induce aggregation of negatively charged particles as the result of local electrostatic attraction between the particle surfaces.  The enzyme-treated fermentation broth was diluted 10 times with milliQ water and centrifuged for 2 h at Batch flotation experiments were performed in a cylindrical flotation device (height: 26 cm and diameter: 3.0 cm) with a similar design as was used by Okada et al. Calculation of the Van der Waals interaction force requires knowledge on the The magnitude of the so-called hydrophobic interaction between the particles and air bubbles can be estimated from their air–water contact angle  In this estimation the properties of In In biological systems the electrophoretic mobility of air bubbles strongly depends on the composition of the liquid phase because surfactants that are present in the broth, such as lipids and proteins, can adsorb at the air–water interface and thus influence the properties of this interface.   Storage of the enzyme-treated broth at 4–8 °C for approximately two weeks did not have a significant influence on the process performance at the optimal pH. Longer storage times resulted in a decrease of the flotation rate constant of the PHA inclusion bodies and thus the efficiency of the separation process. It is important to note that the batch flotation process has not yet been optimised with respect to batch duration and apparatus design. Experiments showed that a decrease in batch duration from 7 to 5 min gave a small increase in selectivity and expectations are that with the right process design a higher yield and purity can be obtained. As an example, three consecutive batch separations were performed with the same set-up at pH 3 in the absence of AlCl In DAF, air bubbles are created by injection of air-oversaturated water. Therefore both air bubbles and water are collected at the top of the flotation device during batch flotation. Transport with the water phase is not selective and reduces the overall selectivity of the process. The relative contribution of non-selective transport by water can be reduced by increasing the pressure in the saturation vessel. This causes an increase in the dissolved air concentration and thus an increase in the volume fraction of air bubbles in the injected water. In continuous (DAF) flotation, non-selective transport of particles in water can also be reduced by injecting water above the feed position such that there is a net liquid flow downward from this additional water injection point to the bottom outlet of the flotation device In the three consecutive batch flotation steps the contribution of non-selective transport is reduced by dilution of the water phase in each step. This is one of the reasons why the purity increases in each step, which indicates that when non-selective transport in the liquid phase can be avoided, very high purities may be reached. The contribution of transport in the liquid phase can be estimated from the mixing behaviour of the liquid phase, which was determined by using potassium chloride as a tracer in a batch experiment. For this purpose the flotation device was filled with 19 g/L potassium chloride solution and air-saturated water was injected. During the experiment the potassium chloride concentration in the overflowing liquid was determined by conductivity measurements. The change in concentration was identical to the behaviour of an ideally mixed system. This conclusion was confirmed by the change in particle concentration in the actual flotation experiments at pH values above 4, where no selectivity was observed and particle–bubble attachment did not occur.  The enzymatic disruption process yields an average cell debris size below 0.4 μm. The average diameter of PHA inclusion bodies is approximately 0.6 μm In The size of the aggregates is difficult to determine from the microscopic images and it is impossible to determine their composition from the micrographs. The flotation behaviour of the particle suspension does give some insight however. During flotation it was observed that all aggregates floated to the top of the flotation device.   The effect of AlCl The recovery of PHA IBs from The particle mixture that was investigated in this work consisted of particles with similar iso-electric points. This makes the selectivity of the aggregation process strongly dependent on differences in Van der Waals interaction, hydrophobic interaction and brush repulsion. It is very likely however, that in other bioparticle mixtures the particles have different iso-electric points. An example of such a mixture was presented by Wangsa-Wirawan et al. Future research on the use of selective flotation in biotechnology should not only focus on particle characterisation, (selective) particle aggregation and (selective) flotation but also on the complete production process because there are possibilities for manipulating the particle properties at an early stage in the process. For example, the properties of biomass are influenced by the conditions during fermentation. Amory et al. The authors would like to thank Gert van der Steen for performing the polyhydroxyalkanoate analysis, Ger Koper for discussions on particle–particle and particle–bubble interactions in flotation, and the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs for funding the research project (EETK99114).  Hamaker constant for interaction between phase i and j (J) Hamaker constant for interaction between phase 1 and 2 across phase 3 (J) concentration of ionic species bubble diameter (m) diameter of particle/aggregate diameter of object elementary charge (C) electrostatic interaction force (N) hydrophobic force (N) fraction of particle type Van der Waals force (N) separation distance (m) Boltzmann constant (J/K) aggregation rate constant between particle types effective flotation rate constant of particle type constant for hydrophobic force between phase 1 and 2 across phase 3 (J) the Avogadro number (mol concentration of particle type bubble Reynolds number (–) interatomic distance in the particle (m) separation factor (–) time (s) temperature (K) electrophoretic mobility (m superficial gas velocity (m/s) ion valency of species  dielectric permittivity of the fluid (F/m) liquid–vapour surface tension (N/m) dispersion component of the surface free energy of the particle (N/m) solid–vapour surface tension (N/m) liquid viscosity (Pa s) attachment efficiency (–) collision efficiency (–) detachment efficiency (–) interception collision efficiency (–) Debye decay length (m) contact angle between the particle and the interface measured (°) contact angle between the material of interest and methylene iodide (°) zeta-potential of object