The recent emergence of micro-devices for vaccine delivery into upper layers of the skin holds potential for increased immune responses using physical means to target abundant immune cell populations. A challenge in doing this has been a limited understanding of the skin elastic properties at the micro scale (i.e. on the order of a cell diameter; ∼10 μm). Here, we quantify skin's elastic properties at a micro-scale by fabricating customised probes of scales from sub- to super-cellular (0.5 μm–20 μm radius). We then probe full thickness skin; first with force-relaxation experiments and subsequently by elastic indentations. We find that skin's viscoelastic response is scale-independent: consistently a ∼40% decrease in normalised force over the first second, followed by further 10% reduction over 10 s. Using Prony series and Hertzian contact analyses, we determined the strain-rate independent elastic moduli of the skin. A high scale dependency was found: the smallest probe encountered the highest elastic modulus (∼30 MPa), whereas the 20 μm radius probe was lowest (below 1 MPa). We propose that this may be a result of the load distribution in skin facilitated by the hard corneocytes in the outermost skin layers, and softer living cell layers below.Within our skin, the viable epidermis (VE, lying 20–150 μm below the skin surface There have been two particular challenges. First, experiments to measure Young's modulus of full thickness skin at a micro-scale have not been performed on a range of sizes of probe to identify scale effects. And second, there is a great disparity in the literature between the measurements that have been made (for example, with the skin's elastic modulus reported to vary by a factor of over 3000 Even within a single measurement method there are wide ranging values reported for elastic modulus. For example, Elleuche et al. In this paper we address this uncertainty surrounding the skin's elastic modulus by considering (experimentally, analytically and empirically) the skin's viscoelastic and elastic behaviour at scales that are physiologically relevant to micro-devices for drug or vaccine delivery. We fabricated probes of precise geometry to directly measure elastic moduli at sub- and super-cellular scale. These probes, micro-machined from tungsten, with flat contact areas (so as to remove uncertainty in indentation contact area) are applied to the skin using high resolution nanoindentation. In force-relaxation experiments, followed by constant velocity indentation experiments, we studied freshly excised skin to measure its viscoelastic and elastic moduli respectively. This provided some important quantifications and qualitative insights into the way that skin viscolelasticity; of direct relevance to targeted delivery of biomolecules using physical means at the micro-scale. The source of skin that we used in this experiment was from the ears of C57 Black/6 mice. This skin source represents a more consistent material than human skin (due to tightly controlled environmental conditions) and a more easily accessible source – it also parallels our previous work on individual skin layers. This was excised following cervical dislocation of the mice, in accordance with The University of Queensland animal ethics. A total of 5 skin samples were used for each probe. Following excision the skin was mounted onto a stainless steel stage with double-sided tape. Filter paper soaked in saline was placed in contact with the excision surface to ensure that the tissue did not dehydrate from these surfaces during experimentation. Despite this, experimentation was completed within 3 h of excision to restrict changes in tissue during experimentation. The probes that we used in this work were developed using two methods. The first method involved modifying pre-fabricated sharp tungsten tips, which were purchased from Omniprobe Inc., (product number AP200/100.7, Texas, USA). These tips had a radius of <0.5 μm and a taper angle of 10–13°. To modify these sharp tips to geometrically blunt tips of defined circular radii, focused ion beam (FIB) was used. FIB milling makes use of Ga+ ions to cut away material within a vacuum, allowing observation by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) Specifically, single sharp probes were created with blunt circular tips 0.5 μm, 1 μm, 2.5 μm, 5 μm and 10 μm in radius. The edges of these were allowed to expand to form a tapered conical shape – this ensured greater stability from buckling whilst avoiding large changes in contact area. To avoid failure of the probes that had very small tip radii (<1 μm), the method described in the previous paragraph was not employed as it resulted in a probe with a very high aspect ratio – which would have buckled at a very low force. To increase the stability of the probe a method that electropolished a tungsten wire of short length (a few millimetres) was employed. This technique uses a wet chemical etching to form sharp tip. The electropolishing setup to create initial probe shapes started with 200 μm diameter tungsten wire (Advent Research materials, Oxford, UK) – chosen due to its high elastic modulus to resist buckling or deformation for small diameters. It was then etched in a setup similar to those described in Miller and Smith To examine the morphology of the created probes a Philips XL30 (Philips, Eindhove, Netherlands) scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used. Probes were mounted perpendicular to the electron beam to allow measurement of the length and tip radius of each probe. A Triboindenter (Hysitron TI900™, Minneapolis, USA) was used for nanoindentation studies. This included a Hysitron MultiRange Nanoprobe™ with a maximum travel of 80 μm and a maximum force of 2N. Manufacturer minimum noise floor was 0.0007% at the maximum load. To mount the probes to the indenter for this work, a custom probe tip holder was kindly fabricated by Hysitron. The design of this was a mount screw with a single pyramidal steel tip with a cylindrical hole through the centre of ∼500 μm in diameter. To determine the elastic material properties of the skin a traditional Hertzian contact mechanics methodology was utilised Within this treatment, If the material is strain dependant (as is the case for skin By taking a finite number of terms this series represents the way in which the material relaxes under loads (specifically, change in elastic modulus). For experiments in this paper a two term series was used, fitting for reduced modulus ( To fit the raw data from the experimentation to the Prony and Hertz models MATLAB To identify both rate-dependant (viscoelastic) and rate-independent elastic properties of the skin two methodologies were employed. The first was a force-relaxation experiment to identify viscoelastic Prony series coefficients. For this, the skin was compressed at 100 μm/s to 15 μm depth, and held at that location. Over the subsequent 10 s the reduction of normalised force (i.e., force-relaxation) was fitted with a second order Prony series (Equation The second method was then to indent the skin at different rates of loading, using the previously determined coefficients to extract the purely elastic material behaviour for each probe radius, i.e., the skin was indented to a depth of 15 μm then unloaded, with the loading curve used for analysis. These experiments were completed at loading velocities of 1, 5, 10, 50 and 100 μm/s (two orders of magnitude variation). The indentations in this study were completed for each of 4 ear samples, with 5 repeat indentations spread randomly across the ear area, for each velocity. The areas were separated by several millimetres and within an individual area the indentations were separated by at least 200 μm (normally much more). The skin was then loaded to a depth of 15 μm, ensuring: 1) the properties measured are not those of the hard base upon which the ear is mounted (i.e., indent is less than 10% depth of the full skin thickness); 2) The collective mechanical properties of around 150 μm will be experienced (i.e., almost the full ear thickness) Once we had the elastic properties of skin in hand we then fitted a mathematical relationship to the data to describe the trend of elastic modulus with probe scale. This takes the form of Equation Following application of probes to the skin they were examined under SEM to ensure that they maintained structural integrity and geometry. Where the geometry had become deformed the probe was replaced and the experiments were repeated, until the full dataset was collected with undeformed probes. To create nanoindentation probes we started with purchased tungsten Omniprobes and used FIB manufacturing to fabricate tightly defined tip geometries. Samples of these are shown in The second technique we used in this study was to electropolish tungsten followed by FIB milling. This matches the most closely related work in this field – that of Kendall et al. For our very small radius probes (0.5 μm diameter) and very large probe (40 μm diameter) the electropolished probes were used mirroring the process of Kendall et al. These probes (shown in To create each probe using electropolished tungsten wire took around 3 h (compared to 15 min for the Omniprobe). On this basis, we used predominantly the Omniprobe for experiments, except in those cases detailed above. Here, we apply the fabricated probes to the skin, using nanoindentation. In doing so, we isolate both the viscoelastic and elastic properties of the skin (method described in Section Building upon this approach, we then extended to perform relaxation experiments with each scale of probe (using both Omniprobe and electropolished probes)– to observe the effect of scale on this material property. The resultant collated data for each probe is shown in Over the full dataset of all indentations performed, correlation of the second order Prony series to the experimental data gave a mean With the Prony series coefficients of skin (at each probe scale), we have the tools to analyse force-displacement indentations to extract skin's elasticity. We indented the probes described in Section During a few of our indentations, the 0.5 μm and 1.0 μm radius probes punctured the skin surface. We were able to identify when this happened as there was a sharp drop in force during nanoindentation (data not shown). Where this happened the results were discarded as the bulk elastic properties were no longer being interrogated. However, this represented only around 10–20% of the measurements with the 0.5 μm and 1.0 μm probes, and only a couple of points at higher probe radius. Collating the indentations, in These collective observations highlighted the requirement to have at least two orders of magnitude range in indentation velocity – to confidently deduce differences due to velocity. We observed that the mean forces for each probe are of similar magnitudes despite large variations in the scale of the indenters. The elastic moduli extracted from our indentation analyses are shown in We found the instantaneous elastic moduli shown in 95% confidence intervals of these variables are as follows:   To contextualise our results against the current body of knowledge, in During each experiment in this work, after the probes (shown in Quantifying and understanding the viscoelastic and elastic properties of skin at micron scales are of importance in advancing the fundamental knowledge of the mechanical properties of skin. The importance also extends to applications within the skin. Examples include the development of drug or vaccine delivery methods that utilise physical targeting of immune cells, in pain-free devices – and also developing automated surgical interventions. Within our study we uniquely identified these properties for full thickness mouse skin, using customised micro-probes and depth sensing technology, showing the scale dependency of this biological tissue. We discuss this below. First, by indenting custom fabricated, defined geometry probes into skin, we found a low dependency of probe scale on the viscoelastic relaxation behaviour of skin ( Once we extracted the Prony series coefficients – to remove viscoelasticity from our analysis – we could identify the elastic properties of skin as a bulk material. The result ( The forces observed ( The load distribution mechanism of the skin gives rise to mechanical properties that are highly scale dependant – with smaller probes experiencing a stiffer material. We found that the relationship we fitted to our data (Equation In addition to the scale dependency of the skin, we observed that when the layers are maintained in their full The micro-fabricated probes within this work had geometries that were of direct relevance to those currently used in microneedle – and specifically Nanopatch pre-clinical experimentation Within this work we wanted to ensure that only the circular frontal areas of the probes manufactured were in contact with the skin. One concern we had was the sloping edges on the smaller probes. Whilst the high corneocyte rigidity and diameter (20–40 μm) and similar indentation force measurements for all probe scales imply that the deformation would not reach these edges, it was important to consider this. As the elastic modulus of skin measured with the 0.5 μm probe is 3 times that of the 1.0 μm probe we can calculate that 8 μm of the probe edge would have to be in (continuous) direct contact with the skin to result in the same forces measured by the 1.0 μm probe. This extreme would have resulted in inflection points in the loading curves as the contact area increased with depth of indentation, which was not observed. Whilst small amount of edge contact was possible with the smaller probes, we do not believe it to have substantially influenced experimental results, even on the 0.5 μm or the 1.0 μm probes. There are many current and emerging methods using physical means to perturb the skin – including projection-based devices; with a diameter scales of the order of a cell diameter ∼10 μm. One example is Nanopatches for targeted vaccine delivery Our work here shows that larger diameter probes are likely to invoke a larger skin deflection before puncture; at which point its surface will remain pushed further down into the hole created. This will cause the SC surface to partially block some of the desirable contact surface. However, a smaller device will require greater structural integrity to withstand the greater skin stiffness and forces. The skin has received renewed interest recently due to the introduction of micro-scale medical devices that utilise precision targeting of layers in the skin for drug and vaccine delivery. However available data on the skin's full thickness behaviour at these scales is limited. In this study we addressed this by characterising skin's elasticity (both rate-dependant and independent) with probes of various sizes on the micron scale. To do this probe tips of precise geometry were fabricated, using two different methods. The first involved focussed ion beam (FIB) milling of purchased sharp tungsten probes, forming blunt circular cross-sections of known radius. The second method involved electropolishing tungsten wire to form a sharp tip, prior to using FIB to shape the tip as desired. These methods gave similar end results with a range of tips from 0.25 μm to 20 μm radius that could then be mounted directly into a nanoindenter. Employing these to probe full thickness skin, initially measured the force-relaxation of skin under a particular deflection, to provide Prony coefficients for its rate-dependant (viscoelastic) response. Over the sub- to super-cellular scale of 0.5 μm–20 μm radius and a fast relaxation of around 40% was observed over 1 s, followed by a slow decrease and plateau up to 10 s – with no discernable scale dependency. Performing further indentations to measure the rate-independent elastic moduli of skin showed high scale dependency; 0.5 μm probes experienced a material with ∼30 MPa elastic modulus, whereas the 20 μm radius probe measured less than 1 MPa. We hypothesis this to be a facet of stress-distribution within the skin by the SC and VE, which presents important considerations for those developing devices to access upper skin layers. Finally, to quantify this behaviour we identified a logarithmic relationship that describes the skin's behaviour with contact radius, and identified that several literature studies correlate well with this. The authors would like to acknowledge funding from a University of Queensland Endeavour International Post-graduate Research Scholarship. We would like to thank Hysitron for their assistance in supplying equipment mounts for the fabricated probes. All members of the Delivery of Drugs and Genes Group (D The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at