Intraarticular phalangeal fractures are difficult to treat. The advantages of using dynamic external fixation devices include distraction of impacted fracture fragments and reduction in joint stiffness by allowing early joint mobilization. Previous reports have concentrated on pilon fractures and dorsal fracture dislocations affecting the proximal interphalangeal joint. We report our experience using a dynamic external spring fixator in the management of 15 patients with a variety of fracture patterns affecting the metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal and distal interphalangeal joints. In three cases the device spanned two adjacent joints. Long-term follow-up has shown excellent range of joint movement and no major complications. We consider that this device is an effective tool in the management of a range on complex intraarticular phalangeal fractures.Complex intraarticular phalangeal fractures with or without associated dislocation are difficult to treat. Conservative management comprising immobilization with splintage alone frequently produces a poor outcome with stiffness, pain and a markedly reduced range of movement ( We report our experience with a dynamic external fixation device similar to that described by The design of the device and the operative technique for its application are a modification of that described by Provided there is sufficient soft-tissue coverage to allow ligamentotaxis, suitable cases for the technique include both closed and open intraarticular fractures of the metacarpophalangeal, proximal interphalangeal and distal interphalangeal joints, in which there is comminution as well as bony impaction. Between January 1997 and July 2001, 15 cases were treated with dynamic external fixation devices ( A variety of fracture patterns were treated using the spring fixator. Six cases involving the proximal interphalangeal joint were associated with dislocation (four palmar-fracture dislocations ( Twelve cases involved a single joint. Of these, the proximal interphalangeal joint was involved in eight cases, the distal interphalangeal joint in one case, and the metacarpophalangeal joint of the thumb in three cases. In three cases the spring fixator was positioned across two adjacent joints with excellent long-term results (cases 2, 5 and 12 in The average follow-up period was 19 (range, 1.5–58) months. Three patients had minor complications. Two had wound infections requiring admission for IV antibiotics, while one patient required additional Kirschner wire fixation. Two patients required minor adjustments of the spring with elastic bands which was undertaken in the outpatient clinic. In three cases it was beneficial to use supplementary internal fixation to fix large malrotated fracture fragments at the time of application of the spring fixator (cases 4, 7, 14 in All patients in our series complied fully with wearing the device and none found it particularly cumbersome. The long-term follow available in 10 out of the 15 patients showed excellent range of movement at the affected joints. Only four out of 15 patients lost full extension of the affected joint. There were no cases of chronic pain or osteomyelitis. Ranges of movement were recorded on 14 patients and are shown in The management of complex intraarticular phalangeal fractures is difficult. Immobilization using splints leads to joint stiffness, while internal fixation is technically difficult and frequently impossible due to comminution of fragments. The advantage of a dynamic external fixation device is that it can apply traction as well as allowing movement at the joint. The traction prevents shortening of the ligaments, which contributes to joint stiffness. Active and passive movement allows tendon gliding and helps limit periarticular adhesions. Cumbersome devices such as the banjo-style outrigger frames achieve distraction, but full active motion is sometimes limited ( Our modification of the spring fixator device described by We have found the application of the device useful for a number of different phalangeal fracture patterns irrespective of the presence of an open wound, provided there is sufficient soft-tissue coverage to allow ligamentotaxis. Six out of 15 cases in this series were open fractures. In addition to its established use in the management of pilon fractures and dorsal fracture-dislocations of the proximal interphalangeal joint ( The complication rate following use of the device was low in this series. Bony union was achieved in every case and there were no major complications. Only three minor complications occurred, none of which required removal of the fixator. Our stiffest joints were all proximal interphalangeal joints (25–90°; 25–85°; 20–60°) in young patients who were able to return to work without chronic pain. All patients were reported to be pain free. Although our series comprises a range of fracture patterns, with or without associated dislocation, the results compare favourably with previous reports ( We thank the patients for their help in participating in this study. We thank Ken Russell and Mark Richards from the maxillofacial laboratory in Salisbury District Hospital for help with design and construction of the spring fixation devices.