The efficient combined use of water and energy in long distance slurry pipelines is analyzed in light of the total cost function resulting from an energy and mass balance. Given a system throughput and a set of common slurry and flow properties associated with long distance cross country pipelines such as Krieger-type rheology and smooth wall turbulent flow with small yield-to-wall stress, the minimum cost condition is obtained at the minimum feasible transport mean velocity. This condition has been found irrespective of the particular value of the dissipation-to-pump station location difference, provided the required pumping power is positive.Long distance pipelines are often a cost-effective means of transporting a wide variety of ores and tailings between remote locations ( Consider an operating slurry transport system of length Assuming a final atmospheric discharge and neglecting minor singular pressure losses (except those intended to avoid column separation, consisting of the appearance of a gas phase in the slurry column, as explained below), the required pumping power is calculated using the energy conservation and the Darcy–Weisbach equation as:  The density Besides the turbulent flow regime requirement, concentrate pipelines are commonly designed to operate above the deposit velocity, corresponding to the lower threshold below which there is sediment formation in the pipe section ( with A smooth wall, fully developed turbulent flow regime with a mean flow velocity deposit limit is considered. This assumption gives a good description of a number of pipeline concentrate flows and, in particular, those copper and iron concentrates that exhibit low yield stresses, given their typical Reynolds number ranges, between 10 According to the smooth wall turbulent friction model by In the present problem, the solid–liquid mixtures are assumed as non-cohesive, and thus the viscosity of such suspensions ( The cost function, given by Eq. In hydraulically smooth pipes the friction factor From Eq. For a relatively broad set of system parameters associated with the transport of concentrates obtained from comminution processes, the minimum flow condition described in Eq. The optimal cost depends also on the friction factor, a function of Before analyzing the role of ℋ, the simpler case of a flat topography with no energy dissipation is considered. Differentiating Eq. The dimensionless cost function becomes a decreasing function of the solid volume fraction and the concavity if its derivative with respect to If so, it is straightforward to obtain that d The fitness of the condition given by the inequality ( The function A similar analysis may be done assuming a friction law based on the logarithmic velocity profile which, in smooth pipelines reads ( The inequality The parameter ℋ is assumed to take a constant value such as when the pressure exceeds the vapor value everywhere. Graphically, this parameter does not modify the slope of the energy line, but only offsets it vertically, as depicted in Given that In real long distance pipeline systems it is common that Although ℋ may take negative values ( If Replacing the condition Combining the condition ℋ On the other hand, from the inequality Cases 1 and 2 show that if the minimum feasible velocity minimizes the cost, then any arbitrary vertical offset of it—either through modifying the pump altitude or introducing a dissipation—will yield the minimum cost with the minimum velocity as well. The minimum flow condition thus represents the key to minimize the cost associated with the energy and water required to hydraulically transport solids as a pseudo-homogeneous mixture, especially over long distances, where the energy cost becomes relevant. It is noteworthy that the present result, stating that the most economic mode of transport corresponding to the minimum safe transport velocity, has not been linked to any particular model for deposit velocity or laminar turbulent transition. Supporting the present results, previous experimental measurements have concluded that higher concentrations and lower velocities are bonded to lower transport costs per unit mass of solids. Thus, the present study somewhat extends the previous knowledge on the optimality of the minimum velocity in energy efficiency to the concept of cost, associated simultaneously with water and energy. In particular, given a fixed throughput, the higher the concentration and the lesser the velocity, the lower the transport cost is. The present analysis does not take into account the computation of the actual minimum, which has been discussed elsewhere for a variety of examples (  constant energy unit cost water unit cost pipeline internal diameter overall pump efficiency hydraulic head Eq. Darcy friction factor Darcy friction factor for a Newtonian fluid magnitude of gravity acceleration vector dissipation head dimensionless number (Eq. pipeline length dry solid flow (throughput) pressure flow rate dimensionless number (Eq. Reynolds number critical Reynolds number pressure pumping power (Eq. slurry volume flow slurry volume flow (deposit velocity) slurry volume flow (laminar-turbulent transition) minimum slurry volume flow water volume flow (Eq. dimensionless number (Eq. specific gravity of solids altitude of the pump station altitude  parameter for the relation parameter for the relation parameter for Eq. water dynamic viscosity viscosity concentration function (Eq. solid volume fraction maximum solid volume fraction density water density  shear stress at the pipe wall yield stress yield to wall stress ratio dimensional cost function cost scale dimensionless cost function dimensionless number (Eq. The author gratefully acknowledges support from the Department of Mining Engineering of If