Phosphorite ores are a potential resource of rare earths (RE) as well as phosphate so the recovery of rare earths during the wet processing of phosphoric acid is important. This study investigates the influence of operating conditions and crystal modifiers on the leaching of RE and the solvent extraction of RE with organo-phosphorus reagents. The results indicate that lower temperature, higher concentration of phosphoric acid and larger liquid/solid ratio are beneficial to RE enrichment in the phosphoric acid. Surfactant additives which enhance the crystal growth of gypsum also enhanced RE leach recovery about 75% under optimized conditions. Studies on the solvent extraction of RE found that D2EHPA mixtures with neutral organo-phosphorus reagents were antagonistic and that Fe3+ competed strongly over RE. Higher D2EHPA concentration, larger phase ratio, lower temperature and lower phosphoric acid concentration increased the RE extraction efficiency. A negative enthalpy change was found indicating an exothermic extraction reaction.Phosphorite is a rare earths bearing mineral that may occur as the main component in individual deposits as well as associated with other minerals, such as apatite ( Wet processing, using the digestion of phosphate rocks by sulphuric acid, is the most common process used to produce phosphoric acid. The overall and simplified reaction between calcium phosphate minerals and sulphuric acid ( Hence, various recovery techniques of rare earths from the phosphogypsum have been developed. For instance, in Russia the rare earths were leached out from phosphor-gypsum with sulphuric acid and then the leaching solution was evaporated to crystallize rare earths or was neutralized to precipitate the rare earths ( On the other hand, rare earths can be recovered directly from phosphoric acid leaching solution and the key problem is to enhance their enrichment. Since 1950s, solvent extraction methods have been studied to recover trace elements from wet-process phosphoric acid leach solutions, focusing on the recovery of uranium. In 1967, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) recovered uranium using a synergistic extractant of DEHPA-TOPO (tri-n-octyl-phosphine oxide), and carried out large scale production ( The phosphorite ore (Fanshan Phosphorite) used in this study consisted of 33.8% P The wet-process phosphoric acid production was simulated in a batch reactor and the rare earth elements in the phosphoric acid and gypsum were determined by ICP (Inductively Coupled Plasma). The morphology of the gypsum was recorded by scanning electron microscopy, after washing by ethanol and dried at 338 The organic and the aqueous phases were shaken in a separation funnel at constant temperature to reach equilibrium. After phase separation, take aliquot of aqueous solution to analyze rare earths with ICP. The RE concentrations in the organic phase were calculated by mass balance. RE extraction efficiency was obtained from RE concentrations extracted. Generally, the dominant species of rare earths in phosphoric acid is RE phosphate which has a low solubility, e.g. the solubility product (Ksp) of the LaPO A series of experiments performed with increasing concentrations of phosphoric acid ranging from 5% to 25% (by the weight of P According to Clearly, the RE leaching efficiency can be enhanced by controlling the crystallization rate and the crystal shape of the calcium sulphate. When the stoichiometric ratio is 1.1, the calcium sulphate is formed with large clusters as shown in A series of experiments was carried out in the temperature range 343 A series of experiments was then performed at liquid/solid ratios ranging from 2:1 to 5:1 Most of the fundamental information in the literature regarding the use of additives is directed towards the inhibition of gypsum crystal growth ( Based on the significant impact of NS-2 on the RE enrichment in phosphoric acid during the production process, the effect of concentration and molecular weight of NS-2 on RE leaching efficiency was studied. The results in Recovery of rare earths from wet-process phosphoric acid by solvent extraction is carried out in highly acidic systems. Generally, acid and neutral organo-phosphorus extractants were used with formula of (RO) The extraction efficiency of acid organo-phosphorus extractants decreases with the increase of C–P bond energy and the existence of the RO branched chain, while the conjugative effect of a benzene ring is beneficial for extraction. Furthermore, acid organo-phosphorus extractants which have a low pKa value can be used in highly acidic systems, such as D2EHPA, P In this work, D2EHPA was chosen as the best extractant and the effect of different mixtures of D2EHPA with TBP, TOA and Cyanex 923 on the extraction of rare earths was examined as shown in In the case of extraction by acidic extractants the reaction may be written as The expression for distribution coefficient Therefore, in general,  The effect of phosphoric acid concentration on the extraction of rare earths by 1.5 Generally, after the purification of wet process phosphoric acid by solvent extraction, the content of P The O/A phase ratio was varied between 1/5 and 5/1 under the following operating conditions: [D2EHPA] The impurity ions in wet-process phosphoric acid mainly include Al Since the species extracted cannot be isolated, an indirect approximation method based on slope-analysis is used for determining the stoichiometry of the extracted species. The distribution coefficient of Eq. According to this relationship, the coefficient In this work, the plot of log [ It is known that D2EHPA at high acidity extracts H  The enthalpy change was determined between −4.7 More effective recovery of rare earths from phosphorite ores and RE enrichment in phosphoric acid was obtained by leaching at lower temperatures, with larger liquid/solid ratio and higher concentration of phosphoric acid. Non-ionic surfactant additives led to a significant increase in RE leaching efficiency up to 75% due to enhanced gypsum crystal growth and less adsorption of RE. D2EHPA in kerosene extracted rare earths from the phosphoric acid solution when there was a high concentration of extractant, large phase ratio, lower temperature and relatively low concentration of phosphoric acid. When the amount of Fe The