The last few decades have seen major advances in instrumentation and technology, and simplifications and modifications of new flotation plant designs. This has allowed for significant developments in process control. In particular, the development of base level process control (control of pulp levels, air flowrates, reagent dosing, etc.) has seen significant progress. Long-term, automated advanced and optimising flotation control strategies have, however, been more difficult to implement. It is hoped that this will change as a result of the development of new technologies such as machine vision and the measurement of new control variables, such as air recovery.
                  This review looks at each of the four essential levels of process control (instrumentation, base level flotation control, advanced flotation control and optimising flotation control) and examines current and future trends within each sub-level.Froth flotation is one of the most broadly used separation methods in the mineral processing industry. However, despite being introduced in the early 1900s and numerous years of research and development, flotation is still not fully understood and remains relatively inefficient. As such, large economic gains stand to be made through optimisation of many present processes ( It is important to realise from the outset that process control consists of several interconnected levels. Several authors, e.g. The lowest level is the instrumentation itself, which is the basis for all process control. As such, the choice/design and maintenance of the instrumentation is of central importance to any process control system. Furthermore, the correct choice of instrumentation can only be achieved if a detailed understanding of the functioning and application of the required instrument, within a given process, is acquired ( Base level flotation control is focused on maintaining primary variables at setpoints. These primary variables include: pulp level, air flowrate and reagent addition rate. This is generally achieved through the usage of conventional SISO PID control; although more advanced methods are now commonly used in modern control strategies. Similarly, traditional base level flotation control was applied to single cells, although modern control strategies are now regularly applied to entire banks of cells (e.g. pulp level control). The two higher tiers of flotation control are advanced flotation control (AFC) and optimising flotation control (OFC). AFC involves the rejection of the effects from input disturbances to the process (e.g. a change in feed grade) and maintaining performance parameters — grade and recovery (although care should be taken when defining recovery; in a dynamic situation accumulation of material within the system and lag times should be considered). OFC, on the other hand, aims to maximise overall financial profitability (commonly by maximising grade and recovery). Both AFC and OFC attempt to achieve their objectives through manipulation of lower level control setpoints. It thus follows that the efficiency of AFC and OFC systems are dependent on satisfactory lower level flotation control systems being in place. Several cells are generally controlled simultaneously; and advanced control methods (which in control engineering terminology classically refers to any control strategy more complicated than SISO PID control; and more recently to computer based technologies) are used as PID control is insufficient. Numerous years of research into the automation of froth flotation control has been conducted to increase process efficiency, with efforts prior to the 1970s being largely unsuccessful. Several authors, such as However, the early 1970s saw extensive improvements in available instrumentation and the research into the development of automatic control of flotation began to show increasing promise ( Despite this,  Authors such as Recent developments in instrumentation have seen the development of tools such as fieldbus technology and image analysis, and have allowed for the assembly of “smart instruments”; devices that use self-diagnostics to provide information about the equipment status and measurement quality.  The aim of this literature review is to broadly explore the various control strategies that have been/are being, developed and utilised from a metallurgist's perspective. This work shall begin with a look at the key variables and considerations in the control of flotation. Each of the four levels of flotation control will then be explored in detail. Lastly, a description of some available commercial control systems and conclusions are presented. It should also be noted that although this paper focuses primarily on cell flotation devices, as opposed to column flotation devices, much of the literature and theory is applicable to both. Froth flotation is a three phase separation process for complex ores based on the manipulation of the difference in hydrophobicity of the solids. Suspended, hydrophobic metal-rich particles are contacted with, and subsequently combine to, air bubbles — whilst the more hydrophilic gangue particles sink and are recovered to the tails stream. The valuable-mineral loaded bubbles report to a froth phase and overflow into a launder, before being recovered to the concentrate stream. Although the process may sound relatively simple other simultaneous sub-processes also occur. Examples include: entrainment of gangue into the froth phase, coalescence of bubbles, de-attachment of valuable particles from bubbles as they impact the froth phase, etc. (  slurry properties (density, solids content) slurry flow rate (retention time) electrochemical parameters/potentials (pH, E chemical reagents and their addition rate (frothers, collectors, depressants, activators) pulp levels in cells air flowrates into cells froth properties (speed, bubble size distribution, froth stability) particle properties (size distribution, shape, degree of mineral liberation) mineralogical composition of the ore mineral concentrations in the feed, concentrate and tailings (recovery, grade) froth wash water rate (especially in flotation columns) Manipulating/measuring each of these variables simultaneously may well be unnecessary to achieve a good process control result. However, each of these variables and their effects on the flotation process should be considered. The process layout is a key consideration in process control. Recycle streams in particular can make process control (e.g. pulp level control) more challenging, especially if accumulation and/or sudden discharges of material are allowed to occur. Additionally, different sections of the plant require different process control regimes; the rougher and scavenger sections being operated at comparatively low froth depths and high air flowrates, to achieve high mineral recovery; whilst cleaner sections operate with greater froth depths and lower air flowrates in a bid to increase grade ( It is important to identify the frequency and severity with which input disturbances can occur for a given flotation process. Existing circuit constraints need to be considered when implementing a process control regime. Two types of constraints exist. Firstly a process may be equipment constrained (e.g. a recovery cannot be achieved because the required air flowrate rate cannot be supplied). Secondly, a process may be constrained by another part of the system; an example being the limitation of the maximum recovery of a desired species, at a high concentrate grade objective, within a flotation plant as a result of insufficient liberation by the grinding circuit ( Information about the input disturbances, process operating parameters and final product quality is required before optimisation and control can be performed; with the quality of measured information largely determining the efficiency of an implemented control system. However, despite the availability of instrumentation for the measurement of important parameters such as: ore composition, flowrates and less ore specific properties (e.g. pulp levels, density, pH) — essential properties such as liberation degree, surface chemistry, bubble size distribution, bubble loading, etc. remain difficult to measure and infer ( Currently, most existing instrumentation on flotation plants makes use of analogue signal technology; with signals requiring conversion into a digital format before interfacing with automation systems. As such, it is thought that analogue technology is to be replaced by digital fieldbus technology. This will result in completely digital communication between instrumentation and base level control systems at source, and has already enabled the decentralisation of pulp level and air flowrate base level control systems. This has also allowed for better integration of base level control during flotation cell design (  Float with a target plate and ultrasonic transmitter Float with angle arms and capacitive angle transmitter Reflex radar Other methods mentioned in literature include:     Lastly,  As such, sophisticated multivariable model-based control methods have been developed; whereby the whole bank of cells is modelled and compensations between adjacent cells calculated and/or considered. Two examples of multivariable control methods are presented in From an A/OFC perspective pulp level control is important as it dictates the froth depth (defined as the distance from the pulp/froth interface to the overflow lip). Theoretically, a deeper froth allows for increased drainage of mechanically entrained gangue, and subsequently, a higher concentrate stream grade (     Problems associated with differential pressure metres include large space requirements, with large sections of straight piping being needed to ensure a fully developed flow profile. One solution is to decrease the pipe size, as the required straight pipe length is related to pipe diameter. Butterfly valves are used to control the air flow as they are cheap and sufficient for the task (   Magnetic flow metres are commonly used to measure slurry flowrates and are based on Faraday's principle of induction, with the device consisting of an electromagnet coiled around an insulated length of pipe. Electrodes are installed at opposite sides of the pipe, which enable an electric current to be generated through the flowing fluid and measuring device. From this measured current a flowrate can be determined. This method is non-obtrusive and modern magnetic flowmeters take up to 30 measurements per minute. Slurry measurement is problematic, however, as solids and air bubbles decrease performance. Moreover, if magnetic solids (e.g. magnetite) are present de-magnetisation is required ( In flotation circuits, slurry flowrates are generally manipulated to control pulp levels in cells (see On-line X-ray fluorescence (XRF) analysers provide elemental assays from process flow streams and are now considered standard hardware on large scale flotation plants ( Despite the obvious benefits of online XRF analysis   Density measurements are used in mass balance calculations, which are associated with A/OFC ( A variety of alternative equipment for maintaining/setting reagent addition rates are used industrially. A simple on-off type dosing system which periodically opens a valve and allows reagent to enter the process. Regular checks are required to ensure the correct amount is added, as this method can be very inaccurate. Metering pumps are also used, especially if volumes to be added are very small or cost is of importance. This method is more accurate, but the pumps are costly and require regular maintenance. Base level reagent addition control commonly consists of a feedforward ratio-type control, as mentioned by Measurement of electrochemical potential (E Conductivity measurement can often be used instead of, or in conjunction with, pH measurement — as both provide complimentary/similar information. Conductivity metres are generally cheaper and are more suitable for highly alkaline solutions, although their use should be avoided in highly aerated systems. In addition, E Base level control of pH involves maintaining the slurry pH at a desired setpoint, through manipulation of acid or lime addition rates, with PID control loops being adequate for the task ( Control of E  The sensor consists of a vertically positioned tube; the lower end is partially submerged in the pulp zone to collect bubbles (see “ The McGill bubble sizing device (see A recent publication by Machine vision makes use of cameras positioned above flotation cells to record digital images of the froth surface. Several froth features can be extracted from these images and used for control purposes. These features are categorised into three types; namely: physical, statistical and dynamic properties. Within each category several methods exist for extracting different variables and/or features. For example bubble size, a physical property of a froth, is one feature that may be extracted through usage of bubble edge or watershed algorithms. An extensive amount of literature has been written about the methods by which features are extracted from froth; with a full, recent, literature review being carried out by  It is commonly observed that the surface bubbles of flowing froths are significantly larger than those in the layers immediately below; the lower layers forming the predominant portion of the volume overflowing into the launder. This cannot be corrected for readily.  The watershed method often over-segments larger bubbles and under-segments smaller bubble sizes. Mobility feature extraction has been shown to be particularly useful within the context of A/OFC. It is common in industry for operators to control and regulate a flotation plant by visual inspection of the froth surface. Indeed, an understanding of processes occurring within the froth phase is central to understanding the overall behaviour of flotation systems ( AFC, also known as stabilising control, aims to reject the effects of input disturbances (e.g. a change of ore type) and maintain the flotation process as close to steady state as possible ( An effective method of keeping the plant's mass balance at steady state is to maintain constant mass pulls and/or re-circulating loads at setpoints (often in conjunction with maintaining grade and/or recovery). Mass pull refers to the amount of concentrate collected. A recent paper by Re-circulating material through a flotation plant results in decreased residence time of material per flotation cell, but does allow for the valuable material to spend more time in the flotation plant as a whole; and, subsequently, increases the overall recovery ( AFC commonly refers to strategies that aim to maintain grade and/or recovery ( The review of the successfulness of alternative AFC strategies is made difficult, as follow-up reports of implemented control strategies are uncommon, as noted by Design of control systems are insufficiently thought out during plant design stages ( A vast knowledge of control systems and jargon is required to develop, install and maintain A/OFC systems; with the majority of operators/metallurgists/management not having a background in control engineering ( As already discussed, the non-linear, complex behaviour of flotation systems complicates modelling attempts; making the design of robust, effective controllers – that can deal with large ranges of operating conditions – difficult. It is partially for these reasons (specifically the latter two) that According to Use of model-based methods Use of expert control systems The evolution and current trends of each of these branches will now be discussed. Model-based methods can be further sub-categorised into two categories, namely: empirical and phenomenological modelling ( Empirical models make use of statistical methods to relate measured input and output plant data, such that multivariable models relating between two or more independent and dependant variables can be established and used for predictive control (e.g. controlling collector addition rate based on concentrate grade). Furthermore, continual analysis of plant data and corrective adjustment of the predictive (model-based) controller make it adaptive to changing conditions (i.e. adaptive control). Adaptive control is especially important within the context of flotation control, which is prone to non-linear, complex behaviour. As such, many predictive flotation control systems often (but not always) include adaptive control aspects. By 1991, Thornton noted that although the amount of literature devoted to multi-variable model-based control was extensive, the number of applications in industry was still comparatively small; with “     Despite the apparent popularity of adaptive multivariable model-based controllers, The use of first-order flotation kinetics modelling is thoroughly covered by Alternatively, a population balance model is presented by Despite much research into both empirical and phenomenological based modelling, authors such as The potential of expert systems in the mineral industry was recognised as early as 1983 (    One area in which AI has been used extensively is the identification and categorisation of froth images from machine vision. In a comparison between expert control and multivariable model-based control methods, The combination of AI and model-based methods is also possible. The upper-most tier of process control in flotation is OFC, which by definition aims to maximise the financial feasibility of the process. This is achieved by determining where on the theoretical grade–recovery curve is most profitable to operate and, subsequently, shifting the operating point orthogonally to further maximise profit (see Grade–recovery curves vary according to feed grade and can be altered through manipulation of plant operating variables such as air rates. In this way, grade–recovery curves can be optimised ( The use of froth stability as a parameter was first presented by In this model the flux of bubble surface area (Ψ  The link between operating cells at PAR air rates and improved flotation performance was also shown in studies presented by Other methods of OFC exist; some using modelling and others resorting to expert control methods. Many model-based optimising flotation controllers are algorithms that locate the optimal operating point on the grade–recovery curve; and then present recovery and grade setpoints to lower control systems and/or plant operators/management. Other modelling-based optimising controllers are more complex, and also consider operating parameter limits and technical details (i.e. not solely economical factors).  However, despite the various OFC strategies outlined in literature, many mineral processing plants currently rely on operators and plant management to manually select setpoints of lower control systems, based on past experience, in order to optimise the process ( Various methods of achieving AFC and OFC have been discussed. A summary of examples using some of these different advanced methods are presented in Various commercial A/OFC systems are available on the market and have been trialled and implemented in industry; many of which have already been mentioned in this communication. One such control package is the Several commercial systems make use of machine vision; these include: Despite several advances in base level controls since the 1970s, reports of fully automated advanced and optimising flotation control systems operating successfully (and unassisted) for long periods remain scarce. It is hoped, however, that through continued development of new, robust technologies (e.g. machine vision and air recovery measurement) and the continued simplification/modifications of plant designs (requiring less-intricate control systems), long term, automated advanced and optimising flotation control will be achievable. Such an outcome would indeed be financially rewarding. The authors would like to thank Prof. Raymond Shaw, Dr. Stephen Neethling and Dr. Kathryn Hadler of Imperial College London for their valuable input and advice.