The Ni3Al intermetallic compound with unique properties is widely used especially for high temperature applications such as gas turbines. There are different ways for producing the compound. Among them, high-energy milling technique using a planetary ball mill has been employed for producing nanocrystalline Ni3Al powders. In this research Ni3Al intermetallic was prepared by mixing pure elemental Al and Ni powders. A ball-to-powder weight ratio of 20:1 and rotation speed of 550rpm in argon atmosphere were considered as the main processing parameters. The milling time ranged from 1 to 55h. Changes in the phase and microstructure as a function of milling time were investigated using X-ray diffraction analysis and scanning electron microscopy. The results revealed that the formation of nanocrystalline Ni3Al with minimum crystallite size of 5nm is obtained after 15h milling. However, further mechanical alloying resulted in increasing grain size. Furthermore, the process efficiency decreased to less than 50% and the lattice strain increased after 55h mechanical alloying.Five intermetallic compounds such as: Al A wide variety of methods including mechanical alloying (MA) are introduced for synthesis of nanostructured intermetallic compounds with ductile behavior. MA is a dry powder processing technique and has been used to synthesize both equilibrium and metastable phases of commercially useful and scientifically desirable materials. The technique was developed by Benjamin The process of MA consists of several stages including loading powders and grinding medium (generally hardened steel or tungsten carbide balls) in a stainless steel container sealed under a protective argon atmosphere, in order to avoid/minimize oxidation and nitriding during milling, and milling for the predetermined period of time. Approximately, 1–2 Although some alloys and intermetallics synthesized by MA such as: Al–Cu Elemental Al powder (Merck-1056–99%, <160 Mechanical alloying of the elemental Al and Ni powders (with 1:3 atomic ratio of Al to Ni) was conducted using a planetary apparatus (model FP2) to produce Ni In order to determine the type and structure of Ni–Al compound formed during milling and to measure the crystallite size and lattice strain of particles the powders were characterized by Bruker; Advanced-D8 X-ray diffractometer. Moreover, morphological changes were examined using a scanning electron microscope model LEO 440i. The size distribution of powder particles was also evaluated by Clemex image analyzer. The crystallite size and lattice strain were estimated through measuring the broadening of the X-ray peaks (Williamson–Hall integral breadth method (WH) Microstructural study of raw materials (  During mechanical alloying, the sharp peaks of as-received powder are broadened progressively with increasing processing time due to the accumulated internal strain and refinement of grains. Meanwhile, the intensity of peaks decreases with mechanical alloying time as shown in As When milling continues, the impacts of balls on powder particles result in the diffusion of Al with atomic radius of 1.43  Variation of lattice parameter of Ni and Al during the milling process is indicated in Ni and A1 powders are only mechanically bonded at first. Diffusive layers are extremely fine so that in some cases are not observed. This is widely accepted that the formation of the intermetallic compound using MA technique is carried out through a diffusion process in which atomic displacement occurs by vacancy mechanism  Impurity formation during long-time milling is one of the problems of mechanical milling. The impurities come from iron element which is a result of balls impacts.  Minimum grain size which is determined by balance between rate of dislocation generation, recovery and recrystallization is achieved through this process. Refinement of grains acts as a limiting factor for continuation of the process. During MAing of nanocrystalline powder grain boundary sliding or migration occurs. As a result, the nanocrystalline structure causes the ductility of Ni With increasing milling time, broadening of Ni Continuous impact of balls at longer milling times results in the sticking of powder to balls and consequently, the process efficiency decreases. The observed decrease in the process efficiency also implies the domination of welding on fracturing. The variation of lattice strain of the ball-milled powder with milling time is shown in The results obtained for the lattice strain are in good agreement with the grain size and the effect of ball impacts. Generally, the lattice strain increases with rising MA time. According to the similar grain size produced at 15 and 20 The Ni The peak broadening analysis indicated that the crystallite size decreases rapidly at the beginning of milling (up to 15 It was shown that the longer mechanical alloying time such as 55 The process efficiency decreases to less than 50% after 55 It was indicated that the rate of increasing lattice strain at the beginning of MA up to 10