Low-grade complex Pb–Zn oxide ore is an important source, and the reserve is very great in the world. It is very difficult to obtain Pb and Zn from the source by traditional technology. In this work, a new technology characterized by sulfidation of low grade Pb–Zn oxide ore with elemental sulfur was developed. The effects of temperature, time, particle size and sulfur amount on the sulfidation extent of Pb–Zn oxide ore was studied at a laboratory-scale. The experimental results show that the sulfidation extent of Pb and Zn oxide reaches 98% and 95% under the optimum conditions, respectively. A flotation concentrate was obtained with 38.9% Zn and 10.2% Pb from the materials which was treated by sulfidation, and the recovery of Zn and Pb is 88.2% and 79.5%, respectively.Pb and Zn are important metals which are mostly extracted from sulfide ores in the world. With the ceaseless exploitation of resources in the world, the high grade ore is exhausted day by day, primary sources are presently insufficient to supply demand and low grade ore are being increasingly exploited. There is very abundant low-grade complex Pb–Zn oxide ore in Yunnan province, China. In the past years, many processes have been tested for treating the oxide ore, such as flotation, gravity separation combined with flotation, hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy etc.  Alkaline leaching of smithsonite Zn–Pb ores were also studied ( Thermal analyses of basic zinc carbonate ( However, there is a little work reported about sulfuration of lead–zinc oxide ore. In this work, low grade Pb–Zn oxide ore was sulfurized with vulcanizing agent by roasting. After the vulcanization pretreatment, oxide ore can partially transform into sulfide ore, which can easily be concentrated by conventional flotation techniques. The mineral was obtained from Lanping lead–zinc ore, China. After crushing and grinding, the materials were screened for different particle size classes with Tyler Sieves, using a mechanical vibrator. The XRD pattern of the materials is shown in Element sulfur (>99% pure, powder) was used as the vulcanizing agent. Sodium hexametaphosphate, copper sulfate, butyl xanthate and pine camphor oil were used in flotation experiments. The experimental apparatus used for sulfidation of the lead–zinc oxide ore consisted mainly of a horizontal tube furnace and ancillary equipment. Temperature was controlled by a PID controller with a sheathed thermocouple inserted into the furnace, and the temperature was read-out through the PID controller. The flotation tests were conducted in a 2 Typically, 350 Temperature plays a very important role in pyrometallurgy. So the effect of the temperature was studied under the smithsonite of particle size −74 The effect of the roasting time from 10 The sulfidation extent of lead and zinc was also affected by the dosage of vulcanizing agent. In our present work, a reagent dosage of sulfur from 0.5% to 10% in the mixture (by weight) was selected and its effect on sulfidation extent was studied.   As mentioned above, the optimum operating process parameters were established as follows: time (60 The XRD pattern of the vulcanized materials is shown in From The mixed flotation of these vulcanized materials was carried out by a conventional mixed flotation process without desliming. The flow sheet of flotation is shown in  There is a significant effect to the sulfidation extent of low lead–zinc oxide ore by reaction time, particle size and reagent dosage of sulfur. The optimum operating process parameters were established as follows: reaction time (60 Galena and sphalerite were formed in the sulfidation roasting of lead–zinc oxide ore. A flotation concentrate was obtained with 38.9% Zn and 10.2% Pb from the materials which was treated by sulfidation, and the recovery of Zn and Pb is 88.2% and 79.5%, respectively. The gas SO The authors thank Li Xiao-Ying, the Engineer of Technology Center of Yunnan Metallurgy Group Co., Ltd, Kunming for providing the facilities to carry out this work.