The present work aims to verify the 3D quantitative analysis of grain boundary fracture in the breakage of single multiphase particles using X-ray microtomography. The breakage of single multiphase copper ore particles (6mm cubic particles) by slow compression was examined. From XMT reconstructed images using the Marching Cube method, interfacial areas between copper mineral grains and host rock were determined for both parent particles and progeny particles. In this way, the specific interfacial area ratio was calculated as a metric for grain boundary fracture. Preferential grain boundary fracture only occurs at low energy dissipation rates and the current results confirm initial results for 3mm cubes published previously by Garcia et al. (2009).The ever-increasing demand for metals, declining ore grades, increasing complex nature of ores, and rising costs for improved processing describe the mineral industry’s current and future status. In such a scenario, there is even greater demand on comminution systems to achieve effective mineral liberation. Improved liberation is realized if preferential breakage of multiphase particles occurs along the mineral grain boundaries. However, for most comminution processes, it is assumed that random fracture occurs. Direct observation of intergranular fracture (fracture along the grain boundary) during multiphase particle breakage is difficult to measure. The best method of analysis is based on the measurement of the interfacial area before and after comminution. For complete grain boundary fracture and complete liberation of all grains, the interfacial area is reduced to zero. If grain boundary fracture does not occur, but rather random fracture, the interfacial area is conserved and the ratio is unity. In this regard, the ratio of the specific interfacial area in the progeny particles to the specific interfacial area of the parent particles is used to describe the extent of grain boundary fracture. For random fracture, interfacial area is not reduced and the ratio is unity. The interfacial area criterion is an important metric to assess the significance of preferential breakage for different breakage conditions ( Particles are stressed either individually (single particle events) or in beds (multiple particle events) in large-scale mills that operate at high throughputs such as occurs in crushers, HPGR’s, and grinding mills. Comminution is an energy-intensive operation and the efficiency of commonly used machines is very low. Particles are often loaded using insufficient energy to cause breakage, being fractured only after repeated low-energy stressing. For instance, when a bed of particles is compressed in a piston-die test device, the breakage of the particles can be correlated with the specific energy of compression ( It has been established that X-ray microtomography (XMT) can be used for the 3D determination of the internal damage of ore particles which vary in size from 40 Further, the HRXMT procedure has been developed for 3D liberation analysis ( Recently, conditions for grain boundary fracture under slow compression have been established by XMT (  The sample preparation (cubic samples), compression test (MTS 810 system), screening procedure (VECO microsieves) and interfacial area measurements with ∼40 For interfacial area measurements, 3D reconstructed images of each 6 Two layers with a total of eight cubes were put into the cylindrical styrofoam container for XMT scanning. Progeny particle size classes from three cubes were scanned together. Afterwards the 3D reconstructed images of progeny particles were separated layer by layer using ImageJ software. The 3D reconstructed images of each 6 Geometrical properties, such as volume and surface area, of each mineral phase for each particle were determined from the XMT reconstructed images. These geometrical properties were then used to calculate the interfacial area. 3D views of particle number 8 are shown in Using a previously calibrated method for interfacial area measurement, the calculation of specific interfacial area ratios (after/before breakage of each particle) as obtained for different loading times are summarized in Force and displacement data were obtained from the compression loading with the MTS 810 system as mentioned previously. Force/displacement data for different particles compressed in 0.05, 0.5, 1, 3, 5, 7 and 10 A plot of specific interfacial area ratio (specific interfacial area after compression/specific interfacial area before compression) versus specific energy is presented in In contrast, a plot of specific interfacial area ratio versus energy dissipation rate (power) is given in A comparison of previous and present experimental results is presented in The specific interfacial area ratio versus specific energy dissipation rate (power) was plotted for current data and previous data as shown in Appreciation is expressed for discussion with Professor Raj Rajamani, and for experimental assistance from Professor Ravi Chandran and Rob Byrnes. Thanks are also due to Ching-Hao Hsieh for the tomography scans.