The quality of lumps may have a significant impact in iron ore mining systems with implications for mineral reserve recovery rates. Improving the quality of lump ore, through a simple yet innovative mineral processing, can maximize recovery of reserves, decrease waste generation, and increase the productivity and sustainability of mines by allowing transition to lower quality iron ores. An example of the application of such principle is described here in which both siliceous and dolomitic banded iron formation rocks (BIFs) were subjected to chemical, physical, and mineralogical characterization before undergoing beneficiation processes in pneumatic jigs and log washer equipment. These processes were found to increase product quality and reduce the levels of contaminants, including SiO2, Al2O3, and fines. The gain in quality led to a reduction in the cut-off grade, from 60% to 58% Fe, while maintaining products specifications. Consequently, a 20% increase in the lump ore reserves was achieved, contributing to the sustainability of the mining system.Economically, a mine can contribute to sustainable development by maintaining or enhancing the wellbeing of the local population. For example, a mine can provide a number of economic benefits to a community, including employing residents, utilizing local services, and contributing funds to regional developmental projects ( The present study investigates the impact of the quality of iron ore lumps on the production process of a mine, focusing on evaluation of the associated gains in reserve. An application of this principle to the Pau Branco mine is presented, providing a clear example of how the introduction of beneficiation methods can impact upon product quality, cut-off grade, and reserve recovery rate, thus improving the sustainability of an operational mining system. Until the early twenty-first century, iron ore mines developed in Brazil focused primarily on hematite bodies. These ore bodies typically had over 60% Fe and low levels of contaminants (such as Al Iron production is a long process that involves knowledge of the ore throughout its life cycle, from the production of pig iron to the final product, steel. To date, great efforts have been focused on improving knowledge of iron ore reserves and iron beneficiation ( Geological features (particularly the mineralogy and petrogenesis) of iron ores play an important role in defining the most appropriate methods for their processing. Thus, the characterization of minerals is essential for the optimal use of a mineral resource, because it provides mining engineers with the information required to define the process route. Moreover, such characterization helps to identify inefficiencies and losses associated with existing processes accurately, enabling the optimization of the overall performance of a production system ( Improvements in processing methods ensure the continuing competitiveness of the steel industry, minimizing losses in the manufacturing process that occur owing to ore quality changes associated with the transition from hematite to BIFs. Previously, most BIF bodies were considered as waste generated by the production process, resulting in them being rejected and stockpiled throughout the development of operating mines. However, newly developed beneficiation plants are capable of undertaking concentration processes for BIFs. For example, for the fraction between 8 The methodology adopted in the present study involved the selection of representative samples of dolomitic and siliceous BIFs from the Pau Branco mine; the lump reserves distribution for this mine is presented in Pau Branco started operation in 1982, running a hematite plant with production capacity of 3.2 To perform the characterization and the beneficiation tests, a total of 2000 The separation of minerals in jigs is based on the stratification of particles in an aqueous medium, where ascending and descending water currents fluidize and compress the grains into relatively homogenous layers. Eventually, the lighter grains become concentrated in the upper layers, whereas the heavier grains tend to settle in the lower layers. For ores with a good liberation grade (i.e. more than 75% of the iron mineral particles are free from contaminants) this concentration method has a high efficiency. Conversely, in log washers and drum scrubbers, beneficiation occurs by attrition of particles, where attrition is defined as the disintegrating effect promoted by relatively weak forces; these forces are weak compared to the strength of comminuting, but strong enough to break unconsolidated conglomerates such as clays or to break bonds between grains ( The operational variables tested in the log washer were adjusted to determine the parameters providing the best performance, which were as follows: 12% inclination, 100 For the pneumatic jigs, the cut between concentrated and reject was adjusted to a mass recovery of 85% of the material fed, this target was established as a economic premise of the project. Amplitude was set to 30 The industrial tests for wet screening and the drum scrubber were performed at Pau Branco’s beneficiation plants. For the test in the drum scrubber, the feeding rate was maintained at 100 Mineralogical characterization was performed by point counting, using reflected light microscopy. The preparation of the samples included (1) cutting, trimming and grinding at 0.03 The dolomitic BIFs, which are composed primarily of hematite and martitic goethite, were found to exhibit lower levels of silica and higher loss on ignition (LOI), compared to siliceous BIFs. More abundant clays were observed in the dolomitic samples, associated with the presence of earthy goethite with high levels of LOI (  The results of the chemical analyses are presented in In the tests conducted in the log washer, total disintegration of clay particles was observed owing to the considerable attrition between particles and between the particles and the blades of the equipment. This is in agreement with the decrease in LOI and Al In the pneumatic jig, iron content increased owing to the elimination of clay and quartz free particles, which would have had low densities. However, the stratification process, responsible for the concentration of Fe was impacted negatively by the generation of fines from the clay particles. The resulting clay material created a pulp, which hindered the stratification of the particles. This was observed primarily during the processing of dolomitic BIFs, where clay particles were more abundant. Because both sample types exhibited high degrees of liberation (i.e., over 94%), particles with high contents of Al In all of the tests, increases in Fe content and decreases in Al A preliminary economic study showing the NPV of two potential alternatives, relative to the base case, where the cut off grade is 60% Fe, is showed in Other mines, within the QF Area, where the same ore types are present, can benefit from jig and log washer process to also increase their lump reserves and NPV. Thereby, iron ore mines can increase their reserve recovery rate, decreasing the waste generation, contributing to the sustainability of the industry. In terms of improving the sustainability of mining operations, maximizing the recovery of reserves represents a great opportunity for today’s mining industry. In particular, the introduction of new beneficiation processes offers the opportunity to decrease the cut-off grade of a mine, helping to maximize reserve volume. Pau Branco mine, a medium sized iron ore mine in the Quadrilatero Ferrifero Area has a production capacity of 4.2 In the present study, samples of lumps (>16 In all tests, gains in Fe content were achieved through the elimination of clay particles and quartz. Moreover, the contents of Al Based on the gains in product quality found here, a 20% increase in the volume of lumps reserve (>16 The results presented here will be applied in a project for the geometallurgical characterization of lumps, thus helping to optimize the mine system and achieve gains in sustainability through maximum utilization of reserves, the generation of less waste, and the reduction of environmental impact and production costs of both mineral and metallurgical processes. This project will be presented in a future paper.