There are many difficulties associated with the development of a quantitative correlation model relating the thermo-mechanical processing parameters to mechanical properties due to the complexity of the problem. In this research, based on the experimental data obtained from a series of forging and heat treatment experiments, the correlation model between hot processing parameters and the mechanical properties of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy has been established using an artificial neural network (ANN) approach. In the proposed model, the input variables are forging temperature, degree of deformation, annealing temperature and annealing time. The mechanical properties are determined as the output variables, including ultimate tensile strength, yield strength, elongation and reduction in area. Subsequently, the generalization capability of the trained ANN model was tested using an unseen data sample. The combined influence of hot processing parameters on the mechanical properties is further studied using the present model. It is found that a reliable correlation between processing parameters and mechanical properties of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy can be obtained. The artificial neural network method is capable of presenting the complex nonlinear relationship including interactions associated with hot processing parameters and mechanical properties.With the rapid development of the modern aviation industry, an increasing number of titanium alloys have been utilized in the manufacturing of components for high performance flight vehicles. Particularly, α+β two-phase titanium alloys are considered as the workhorse alloys owing to their excellent strength and favorable hot working ability In recent years, artificial intelligent technology is experiencing rapid advances in the field of materials science and engineering. As a key branch of soft computing, the artificial neural network (ANN) technique has been proposed as a kind of powerful tool to deal with a series of complicated problems such as non-linear systems and unknown data prediction. An artificial neural network is an advanced intelligence application which has been used on a regular basis in the development of models in a number of areas in science and engineering. Basically, an ANN is a computing system comprised of a number of simple, highly organized processing elements that process data information by their dynamic state in response to external inputs The Ti–6Al–4V alloy utilized in this work was supplied in the form of bars with 130.0 Traditional modeling methodology cannot easily present the correlation between processing parameters and mechanical properties of these alloys and metals in that the relationship is quite complicated and highly non-linear. As a robust data information treatment system, artificial neural networks can be used to simulate the neural networks structure of the human brain so that it can represent and capture the complex non-linear relationships between inputs and outputs variables with sufficient reliability Before the neural network model is trained, both input and output variables have to be unified between 0 and 1 in order that the ANN model is able to identify them effectively without specific factor dominating the learning rate of the ANN model. The extensively acknowledged approach of unification is expressed as: During the training procedure of the ANN model, it was found that the where In the present investigation, on the basis of the actual experimental data sets and the robust generalization ability of the ANN model, the optimum annealing time is selected as 5 The objective of this work is to explore the application of artificial neural networks in the development of understanding and predictive capability to correlate the mechanical properties to the processing parameters of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy. Using the experimental data sets from a series of forging and heat treatment experiments, the artificial neural network method has been employed to predict the mechanical properties and study the combined influence of processing parameters on the properties of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy. The following conclusions can be obtained safely from the present investigation. In the proposed ANN model, the input variables are forging temperature, deformation degree, annealing temperature and annealing time, and the output variables are the mechanical properties, including ultimate tensile strength, yield strength, elongation and the reduction in area. The structure of the established ANN modal was determined as 4-14-4, which delivers the capability to predict the properties of the Ti–6Al–4V alloy. It is indicated that the complicated correlation between processing parameters and the mechanical properties has been developed. More importantly, the trained ANN model can be used to determine the combined influence of processing parameters on the mechanical properties. It was found that the yield strength increases with the increasing deformation but there is no evident effect of deformation degree on the elongation. Moreover, no obvious relationship between forging temperature and mechanical properties is presented. Strength decreases and ductility increases slightly with increasing annealing temperature. Therefore, this study has shown that an artificial neural network approach is capable of solving the problems of multiple affecting variables and complicated non-linear relationships with favorable reliability and efficiency. Authors would like to acknowledge the support of