Introduction
                  Trochanteric hip fractures in elderly patients with osteoporosis are commonly caused by low energy trauma. The cardioversion therapy is an extremely rare cause of this type of fracture.
               
                  Presentation of case
                  We report the case of a woman with hip fracture after cardioversion.
               
                  Discussion
                  We discuss the production mechanism of this injury and the importance of the care of the osteoporotic bone under these therapies.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The propofol sedation should be complemented with skeletal muscle relaxants in the cardioversion therapy to avoid hip fracture in select patients with osteoporosis.Electrical external cardioversion is very secure treatment for the atrial fibrilation. Fractures as a complication in this type of treatment are rare, and usually accompanied by some previously predisposing factor. We report the case of a fracture after the application of this therapy in a patient with osteoporosis. The work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria An interconsultation from the cardiology service was received in our department about a 74-year-old woman with right hip pain, who was unable to bear weight and stand on her right leg; there was no previous history of trauma. The patient had a medical history of low energy fracture of femoral right neck 14 years before, treated by means of closed reduction and internal fixation with screws, a myocardial ischemia with low ejection fraction and atrial fibrillation was diagnosed in December 2013. The patient had to undergo an electrical cardioversion in order to pass to sinus rhythm in 2014. Previously she followed an anticoagulation protocol for 4 weeks. The patient underwent electrical external cardioversion, thoracic, anterolateral and synchronized with a two-phase crash of 150 A radiological study of the hip was requested where a trochanteric fracture was observed through the points of entrance of the screws ( This type of hip fracture is produced by an uncontrolled violent, simultaneous contraction of pelvic and trochanteric muscles. It occurs during convulsion from an electric cardioversion In our case, the osteoporotic hip is subject to great vectors of force caused by isometric contractions and is fractured on the weakest part, the entrance point of the previous screws, like in the only case found in the literature, the patient had a stress fracture in that femur nine years before We propose that the propofol sedation should be complemented with skeletal muscle relaxants to avoid these injuries in patients with osteoporosis and risk factors like these before the cardioversion therapy. The hip fracture in osteoporotic bones should be considered after muscle violent contraction that causes hip pain and functional impotence. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interests regarding the publication of this paper. None. The study was approved by the Deontological Committee of Lozano Blesa Clinical Hospital, Zaragoza. Patient consent has been obtained to publish this case report. All authors contributed significantly and in agreement with the content of the manuscript. All authors participated in data Collection and in writing of the manuscript. J. Gómez.