Diaphyseal femoral fractures are common and can present as isolated injuries or as part of a polytrauma situation. Management of these fractures requires an understanding of the timing of definitive surgery in systemically unwell patients, as well as the physiologic effects of reaming and instrumentation of the femoral canal. An appreciation of biomechanics of femoral nails, along with other implants, and the nuances of their application is essential in achieving a satisfactory outcome.This review will focus primarily on intramedullary nailing for diaphyseal femoral fractures in adults, though plating and external fixation will be touched upon. Paediatric fractures and fractures of the proximal and distal femoral metaphyses are beyond the scope of this review. Emphasis will be placed on the systemic effects of both the fractures themselves, and the act of reaming and nailing the femur. High-energy fracture patterns and those that are open have been covered in a recent review article Several studies have examined the incidence of femoral fractures. The femoral shaft is curved in the sagittal plane, with an anterior bow. The cortex is thickened posteriorly, as it is the compression side of the bone in the sagittal plane and also carries the linea aspera. Distally the cortex thins and expands into the metaphysis. Proximally the femoral anatomy is characterized by the head, neck and trochanters. The central anatomical axis of the neck is offset anterior to the central anatomical axis of the shaft in the sagittal plane – this explaining why the correct entry point for most nails is biased anteriorly. The neck-shaft angle is of the order of 130° (124–136°) in the coronal plane. The blood supply to the femoral head arises from the anastamotic ring around the base of the neck, which superiorly traverses the piriformis fossa, putting it at risk when using this as an entry point in nailing. Blood to the diaphysis is supplied Reaming initially reduces the endosteal blood supply, although any instrumentation of the femoral canal (such as an unreamed nail) also has a significant effect (see below). With increasing age, the morphology of the femoral diaphysis changes, with endosteal resorption and periosteal apposition of bone. This leads to the characteristically larger diameter but thinner cortical diaphysis, often accompanied by an increase in the anterior bow. The two most commonly used classification systems for diaphyseal femoral fractures are the AO-OTA system ( Both systems are useful in predicting axial and rotational instability of the fracture and therefore help with management planning. Neither is necessarily predictive of outcome or time to union. The AO-OTA system uses an alphanumeric code to describe the bone involved, which segment of the bone, and the fracture pattern/energy. For the femoral diaphysis (bone 3, segment 2) the patterns of fracture are described as simple (A), wedge (B) and complex (C) with further subdivisions ( Winquist described the degree of comminution in a fracture and thus the degree of cortical contact or continuity ( In the polytrauma and major trauma situation patients are typically assessed and managed according to standardized protocols, such as the Advanced Trauma and Life Support (ATLS) system. Femoral fractures can be a major source of blood loss and should be splinted as a means of haemorrhage control. In clinical situations where patients present with isolated femoral injuries, or not as part of a major trauma situation, a thorough history and clinical examination is mandated. This can be taken from the patient and/or paramedics and will give valuable clues as to the mechanism of injury and the potential for associated soft tissue and skeletal injuries. The patient's general medical status, drug and past medical history, allergies, co-morbidities, timing of last food and drink and other relevant clinical information are essential to the pre-operative assessment. Examination of the affected limb should include a neurological and vascular assessment and a visual inspection of the soft tissues, including a careful assessment for compartment syndrome. Plain radiographic imaging is usually sufficient for diagnosis and operative planning and should include the ipsilateral hip and knee to rule out an associated femoral neck fracture or articular injury. Computed tomography (CT) is usually reserved for major trauma patients undergoing trauma CT or for patients who require CT angiography to assess possible vascular injuries. Splintage of the femoral fracture, initially in the form of fixed-point traction, typically against the pubis and ischium, provides the best analgesia and can allow for gross correction of rotational malalignment. These splints should be removed early to reduce the risk of pressure necrosis and pudendal nerve injury. Balanced traction (skin or skeletal) can be used in patients who are waiting for surgery and are physiologically well. In terms of pain relief, adequate oral and intravenous analgesia and regional femoral nerve block with local anaesthetic should be considered. Fluid resuscitation (blood product or crystalloid) should be administered as required. The 1980's heralded the era of If the injury causing the fracture is considered the ‘first hit’ to the patients systemic inflammatory system, then any surgical intervention subsequently is considered the ‘second hit’. The ‘first hit’ primes the inflammatory cascade and causes a degree of DCO relies on moving the large ‘second hit’ associated with definitive surgery out of the window of hyperinflammation, and allows time for the patient to be stabilized and reduce the physiological burden of reconstructive surgery ( DCO still requires there to be a ‘second hit’ in the early post injury phase, in the form of temporizing surgery (haemorrhage control, debridement of open wounds, vascular repair and rapid external fixation), but this insult is smaller and typically avoids the instrumentation of the femoral canal that is so physiologically taxing. Significant reductions in mortality and complications were seen as a consequence of the shift to DCO in femoral fracture patients. Morshed et al., showed that waiting just 12 h before fixation in patients with an In the last 10 years, focus has shifted towards trying to identify which patient groups can have their femoral fractures treated early and which should wait. Three patient groups are now considered: those who can have their fractures treated early (ETC), those who must wait (DCO) and those who fall in between – the so-called ‘borderline patient’. Physiological parameters such as venous lactate, interleukin-6 (IL-6), temperature, coagulopathy and respiratory function have all been shown to be useful in guiding this decision making process. Rising lactate (>2.5 mg/dl) and IL-6 (>200 pcg/L), falling temperature and altered clotting parameters are good predictors of SIRS and mortality after trauma and thus can be used as indicators that DCO is probably needed. It is the ‘borderline patient’ who must be looked at closely. These patients typically have femoral fractures (single or bilateral) with pulmonary injury but no other major system injury ( Those with pulmonary dysfunction and those with bilateral fractures are physiologically considered to be as ill as polytrauma patients and may be best served with DCO treatment. In the absence of major head or chest injuries, patients with multiple injuries and bilateral femoral shaft fractures have a similar complication rate to polytrauma patients with unilateral fractures. Rarely are fractures of the femoral shaft in adults treated without operative intervention. Skin or skeletal traction, as definitive methods of fixation, are now largely historical although occasionally may still be used. Non-operative methods are associated with high rates of malunion and shortening. The commonest surgical method of treating femoral shaft fractures is using an intramedullary nail. Modern nailing traces its origins to Küntscher in 1939, but descriptions of intramedullary devices have been found from well before the 20th Century.  Older generation nails were typically thin-walled and may or may not have been slotted. These nails were weak in torsion, although offered excellent interference fit within the femoral canal. Modern generation nails are thick walled and no longer rely on slotted geometry to facilitate insertion, but rather rely more on anatomic contouring. Typically nails now have a radius of curvature (150 cm) that is nearer that of the radius of curvature of the femur (around 120 cm) compared to the straight nails of old. Most modern generation nails are cannulated to facilitate insertion – by keeping the cannulation small there is little effect on the strength of the nail. Flutes may be present to facilitate rotatory stability of the nail and to reduce intramedullary pressure at the tip of the nail on insertion. All modern nails offer multiple locking options both proximally and distally.  Faster operating times and less risk of malreduction have been shown with freehand techniques, but there is no difference in functional outcome or other parameters. Nailing freehand typically requires one assistant to apply traction or the use of a femoral distractor. Rotation is easier to assess with the freehand technique as it allows radiographic visualization of the lesser trochanter and patella of the contralateral femur as a comparison. Lateral positioning is beneficial in that it provides easier access to the piriformis fossa and facilitates nailing of fractures in the proximal portion of the femur, as well as in large or obese patients. However, it is not suitable in a polytrauma situation and limits the assessment of rotation. A floppy lateral position is described with good results in polytrauma patients but again risks malrotation.  Earlier nails with overhanging jigs risked iatrogenic fracture using this entry point It is also noted that certain fracture patterns such as reverse oblique proximal fractures with an abducted proximal segment have a tendency to collapse into varus if straight piriformis nails are used. This is usually due to inaccurate lateral placement of the entry point on the trochanter for a nail intended for the piriformis fossa. Trochanteric entry nails have been developed with a lateral bend on the proximal segment of the nail, typically ranging from 4° to 10°. The trochanteric entry portal has been shown to reduce operative time and be easier to use in obese patients, as well as the polytrauma situation  Retrograde techniques have been shown to have a higher incidence of malrotation and shortening than antegrade, and there may be an association with knee pain. There is little difference in functional outcome, time to union and malunion comparing antegrade and retrograde nailing. Unsurprisingly, antegrade nails cause more problems related to the hip and retrograde give problems with the knee.  Intramedullary techniques to assist fracture reduction include bending the tip of the guidewire to allow for control in guiding into the centre of the distal segment, and also the use of a rigid cannulated scoop to guide the wire across the fracture site. Another method is to ream and insert the nail into the proximal segment, and then use the nail itself as a joystick to align the fracture and pass the wire through the nail. The nail can then be backed out and reaming of the distal segment can be achieved – this technique is good for mid diaphyseal fractures and can be used in unreamed nailing with ease ( Extramedullary techniques can be closed, instrumented or fully open. Closed techniques include use of mallets as pushers, and the PORD or a crutch to reduce posterior sag. The F-tool is a radiolucent device with adjustable limbs that allows for the application of countering forces either side of the fracture to aid reduction. Historically described techniques include the use of sheets around the limb to be pulled in opposing directions. Instrumentation of the fracture fragments may be needed. This need not be a fully open procedure. The use of Schanz pins as joysticks, or attached to a femoral distractor, are examples of this. Full open reduction in the acute setting should be avoided if possible. Perhaps an exception to this is the use of a clamp or cable to reduce a subtrochanteric fracture, as any malreduction here (especially varus) will lead to an increased risk of implant fatigue failure. Colinear reduction clamps have a smaller footprint than Hey-Groves or Verbrugge clamps and require smaller incisions; nonetheless, their use still leads to a disturbance of the fracture biology.   This leads to up-regulation of the systemic inflammatory response and it is this that can be physiologically catastrophic for the polytrauma patient – hence the advent of DCO. Müller demonstrated that it is the first broaching of the canal and the initial instrumentation that cause the highest pressure spikes, not the reamers themselves. Although the reamers do induce lesser pressure spikes, the subsequent insertion of the nail gives another more significant peak. As such, it can be seen that unreamed nails are equally at risk of inducing a physiologic response. Fat embolism is characterized by the clinical picture of hypoxia, confusion and altered mental status, with a petechial rash as well as pulmonary oedema, tachycardia and shock. The classic textbook description is a triad of rash, confusion and hypoxia. It is considered a systemic response to embolized fat globules. Two theories exist as to why these globules appear in the blood. The mechanical theory is supported by the fact that fat is typically liberated by reaming the femoral canal, although can occur due to the fracture itself. Reaming is associated due to the high intraosseous pressures achieved, forcing fat into the systemic circulation, it is assumed,   Assessment of rotation intraoperatively can be made using one of two principal methods. The first is the cortical step sign. This relies on the same cortex (medial or lateral) either side of the fracture being the same diameter, indicating correct rotation. A difference in cortical width indicates malrotation. It is important to note that the femur has differing widths to its cortical bone along its length, being widest medially in the proximal third, widest posteriorly in the middle third, before thinning significantly in the distal third. Femoral malrotation after nailing is common, reported in up to 20–30% of cases. However it would seem that only deformities of 15 degrees or more are clinically and functionally significant, with external rotation deformities causing the most symptoms.  The working length of a nail is essentially defined by the distance between the two closest points of stable contact the nail makes with bone either side of the fracture. This can be the distance between locking bolts, although if there is a good contact between nail and bone at the isthmus, this can affect the working length. Leaving a nail unlocked at one end can be safe in either proximal or distal third fractures, where there is a good isthmic fit. Here the working length of the nail is between the isthmic point of contact and the locked screws the other side of the fracture, thus eliminating the need to lock the far end of the nail. Historically the gold standard for femoral nailing has been reamed, statically locked nails, as shown in a series of landmark papers by Brumback. There is little evidence to support the dynamization of nails either acutely or in a delayed fashion to prevent or treat non-union. Rarely, nails can be left unlocked either proximally, distally, or both: predominantly in axially and rotationally stable fractures. This is an unusual beast, however, as an axially stable fracture is typically transverse and thus rotationally unstable and vice versa. The size and number of locking bolts, along with their configuration, is important. Bolts of less than 5 mm diameter have significantly lower fatigue strengths and are prone to early failure. A 20% increase in core diameter equates to a 50% increase in bending strength – hence a 5 mm bolt is significantly stronger than a 4 mm bolt – there is a 20% difference in diameter. Although most research on locking bolts relates to tibial implants, the evidence is against using narrow diameter bolts   Winquist's original series described a rate of non-union of less than 1% even in open fractures when using reamed nails. Infection rates of less than 1% are the norm, rather than the exception, even in the case of open fractures. Heterotopic ossification is described as occurring radiographically in over 50% of patients although the majority are very mild and have little clinical significance. It is seen perhaps more commonly with piriformis rather than trochanteric entry antegrade nails, but there are few parameters with which to predict its occurrence. Although far more common in the tibia, compartment syndrome can occur in the thigh and risk factors include multiply injured patients, systemic hypotension, a history of external compression of the thigh, the use of military anti-shock trousers, coagulopathy, and vascular injury. Rarer complications include pudendal nerve palsy associated with prolonged time on the traction table It stands to reason, of course, that there is more than one way to treat femoral diaphyseal fractures. Even though closed intramedullary nailing has become the gold standard for most clinical situations, plate osteosynthesis and external fixation are also well described and can be acceptable methods of treatment. External fixation, in the form of monolateral rigid fixators, is typically reserved for patients who remain systemically compromised. Initial temporary stabilization is achieved in the damage control situation in the same manner as described above. The fixator can be stiffened with the addition of further pins and bars as needed, with limited physiological effect on the patient. Despite the systemic benefit of this treatment method, pinsite infections around half-pins, loosening and loss of reduction are all limitations. Circular frames are an alternative, although rarely used as primary fracture management in the femur, unless the soft tissue envelope is severely compromised. Internal fixation was previously the accepted standard of management before and during the early years of Küntscher's work. It has remained an acceptable but not necessarily first choice method of treatment. The off-axis fixation of plate osteosynthesis is less mechanically favourable than the on-axis support offered by an intramedullary nail. Modern plating methods rely on minimally invasive techniques to preserve fracture biology. With percutaneous techniques, avoidance of opening the fracture site means that the correction of alignment and rotation is achieved in a similar fashion to nailing. One of the biggest limitations of plate fixation is the potential need to restrict weight bearing, especially in patients who have a lack of cortical contact at the fracture. There is a higher incidence of non-union and infection when comparing plate fixation with intramedullary nailing. Special consideration must be given to the unique situation of an ipsilateral femoral shaft fracture and femoral neck fracture. This bifocal injury is commonly missed, occurs more frequently than anticipated and is an entirely separate entity to the iatrogenic fractures seen with the piriformis entry nails. Although the incidence of ipsilateral neck fracture is between 3 and 5%, it is reported that up to 31% of cases are missed, and in 20–40% there is a concomitant ipsilateral knee injury. Femoral shaft fractures in adults are reasonably common and can occur in isolation or in association with other injuries. They are typically high-energy in aetiology, especially in young adults, and require special consideration to the physiological impact of injury on the patient. The evolution of treatment for these fractures has seen changes in the timing of surgery as well as the techniques employed, but the principles of stable internal fixation remain. Good outcomes and low complication rates can be expected if the operating surgeon has a thorough understanding of the anatomy, basic science and surgical technique relating to the treatment of femoral shaft fractures.