The Ca–Se(IV)–H2O and Ca–Se(VI)–H2O systems were studied by contacting either selenious acid or selenic acid solution with calcium oxide to attain equilibrium at 25 °C for one month. Analysis of the final solid phases and the associated solution, together with X-ray diffraction analysis and a study into the graphed relationships, showed the existence of three calcium selenites in the Ca–Se(IV)–H2O system — Ca2SeO3(OH)2·2H2O (Se(IV)=4.8×10−5–2.8×10−
                     
                     4 M); CaSeO3·H2O (Se(IV)=2.8×10−4–0.86 M) and Ca(HSeO3)2·H2O (Se(IV)>0.86 M). It also showed four calcium selenates in the Ca–Se(VI)–H2O system — Ca2SeO
                        4
                     (OH)2 (Se(VI)=0.21–0.39 M); CaSeO4·2H2O (Se(VI)=0.40–9.1 M); CaSeO4 (Se(VI)=10.2 M) and CaSe2O7 (Se(VI)>10.8 M). The X-ray diffraction analyses reported and SEM analyses indicate a high degree of crystallinity of all seven compounds. The stability and solubility regions for these compounds were defined versus pH, and the conventional solubility constants and conditional free energies of formation for the less soluble CaSeO3·H2O, Ca2SeO3(OH)2·2H2O, CaSeO4·2H2O and Ca2SeO
                        4
                     (OH)2 were calculated from solubility data obtained.In the hydrometallurgical and mining waste water processes, calcium hydroxide and calcium carbonate have been used often as a neutralizing agent or pH adjustor. Sulfate ion is usually removed as CaSO In 1997, Dumm and Brown investigated the phase equilibria in the CaO–SeO Recently, the book entitled “Chemical Thermodynamics of Selenium”, compiled by In this study, the equilibrium experiments for the Ca–Se(IV)–H The experimental procedure adopted did not introduce other ions than calcium, selenium(IV), and selenium(VI) into the systems investigated. Nor was a supporting electrolyte used. All chemicals were analytical reagent grade. CaO was prepared as a source of calcium by calcining Ca(OH) For the phase study in the neutral and alkaline ranges, CaO of various predetermined weights was placed in 100 mL sealable glass bottles each containing 50 mL of selenium(IV) solution (0.10 mol/L) or selenium(VI) solution (0.60 mol/L) in an atmosphere of nitrogen to exclude atmospheric carbon dioxide. For the phase study of the Ca–Se(IV)–H The graphical procedure known as Schreinemaker's Wet Residue Method (WRM) adopted in previous studies ( The specific gravity of the solution was measured using a specific-gravity bottle at 20 °C. Calcium in the filtrates and precipitates was determined by titration with a standard EDTA solution using Eriochrome Black T solution as indicator. For analysis of low levels of calcium in the filtrates (below 0.1 g/L), the inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP) was used. Selenium(IV) in the filtrates and precipitates was determined by a back titration method of the unreacted thiosulfate with a standard iodine solution after reduction of selenium(IV) to selenium(III) with an excess of sodium thiosulfate. Selenium(VI) in the filtrates and precipitates was determined in the same manner after reduction of selenium(VI) to selenium(IV) with hydrochloric acid in a boiled water bath. For analysis of low levels of selenium in the filtrates (below 0.5 g/L), the ICP method was used. All of the results from the analysis of solutions and wet residues, and solutions and precipitates (dried in vacuum) are presented in The selected wet residue samples (which are marked with an asterisk in  The analytical data for solutions, wet residues and precipitates are presented in The selected wet residue and precipitate samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction. The typical X-ray diffraction patterns of the four compounds are shown in The SEM images for the four compounds produced in this work are shown in  In this study, it was found that the basic compounds, Ca The chemical equilibria reactions and conventional solubility product constants for the two less soluble calcium selenites, CaSeO The concentrations, [Ca Aqueous equilibria and equilibrium constants which were calculated from the standard free energies of formation listed in the NBS Tables of Chemical Thermodynamic Properties ( The mass balances for the Ca and Se(IV) species are: Combining Eqs. The concentrations, [Ca The conditional free energies of formation for the calcium selenites estimated from the solubility constants are: The chemical equilibrium equations and conventional solubility product constants for the calcium selenates, CaSeO The conventional solubility constants for these reactions were calculated from the experimental solubility data and the standard free energies of formation for appropriate species in a similar manner as was described above for the calcium selenites. The constants obtained from each experiment and the average of these values are listed in The conditional free energies of formation for calcium selenates were estimated from the average of solubility product constants: In this study, the conventional solubility product constants and conditional free energies of formation for the calcium selenite, Ca(HSeO The chemistry of the Ca–Se(IV)–H The authors wish to express appreciation to Prof. Larry G. Twidwell for critical reading of the manuscript.