Objectives
                  Intramedullary nailing is a common method of treating tibial shaft fractures. However, precise control of reduction at the proximal and distal quarters is difficult to achieve. The purpose of this study was to assess the results of plating using locking screws and the feasibility of a minimally-invasive approach.
               
                  Patients/participants
                  All patients with tibial shaft fracture treated by means of locking plates from January 2004 to October 2006. Thirty-two fractures were treated in 32 patients with a mean age of 43.8 years.
               
                  Intervention
                  Internal fixation with a locking plate and screw construct, using a minimally-invasive or standard approach.
               
                  Main outcome measurements
                  Surgical approach, time to weight bearing, complications and their type, time to bone union, alignment in the frontal and sagittal planes on anteroposterior and lateral radiographs.
               
                  Results
                  The minimally-invasive approach was performed in 28 cases and immediate full weight bearing allowed in 25 cases. At a mean follow-up of 27 months, two patients had died and two patients were lost to follow-up. The mean time to bone union was 9.1 weeks. Four cases had a complicated course: one infection, one compartment syndrome, one hardware breakage and one pseudarthrosis. Six cases ended up with valgus malunion exceeding 5° in the frontal plane, already present at the time of surgery.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Where a minimally-invasive approach can be performed, immediate pain-free weight bearing can be allowed without further displacement at follow-up. The observed rate of malunion underlines the need for adequate reduction and shows that the rationale for success does not solely depend on the plate anatomic design but also on the skills of the operating surgeon.
               
                  Setting
                  Level I university regional hospital Cohort study.Locked intramedullary nailing is the gold standard for treating fractures of the tibial shaft This series includes all fractures of the tibial shaft, according to the AO Classification, and treated with a locking plate in a level I academic regional hospital, from March 2004 until October 2006. We reviewed 32 consecutive fractures retrospectively. There were 32 patients, 14 women and 18 men, with a mean age of 43.8 years (16–90) at the time of surgery. All were closed fractures with the exception of one Gustilo I fracture. According to AO Classification, diaphyseal fractures involved the proximal third in five cases, the mid-third in one case and the distal-third in 26 cases. Among the fractures located in the distal third, eight had an extension down to the tibial plafond, without articular involvement. They were classified as 43C1, according to AO Classification, because of the fracture extending down to the tibial plafond, without displacement at articular level, although the main component of the fracture was located in the diaphysis. The remaining fractures were mainly A Type and were comprised of 21 cases of 42A1, txo cases of 42B1 and one case of 42B3. The hardware consisted exclusively of anatomical locking plates (LCP, Synthes GmbH, Solothurn, Switzerland) made from titanium alloy. Two types of plates were used: proximal, lateral tibial plates to treat proximal or middle third fractures and distal, medial tibial plates to treat middle third or distal fractures. Surgery was performed as an emergency procedure in the case of open fracture and all the other cases were operated within 3 days following trauma (median 1 day). Patient positioning for surgery depended on the fracture type and operating surgeon. Positioning was either performed using a traction table, with the reduction obtained using transcalcaneal skeletal traction, or on a standard table, with the reduction obtained using a temporary external fixator (tibiotibial for proximal or middle third fractures, tibiocalcaneal for distal fractures) ( The “minimal-invasive approach” performed depended on the type of plate being used. A proximal anterolateral approach was performed when using proximal tibial plates and a distal medial paramalleolar approach was performed when using distal tibial plates. Osteosynthesis was performed through a minimal-invasive approach, the plate being slid subcutaneously and outside of the periosteum. The Less Invasive Stabilization System (LISS) instrument was used when inserting a proximal lateral tibial plate, allowing for percutaneous insertion of distal screws. In order to better distribute and absorb strains, it was advocated to use a long construct, with at least five holes beyond the fracture and to leave one hole unfilled between two consecutive screws At follow-up, clinical and radiographic data were recorded. To document bony consolidation, bridging callus on three cortices was sought on anteroposterior and lateral views, combined with pain-free full weight bearing. Malunion was defined as a deformation exceeding 5° in frontal, sagittal and transversal plans The mean follow-up was 27 months, range from 14 to 45 months. At follow-up, two patients representing two fractures, died at respectively 4 days and 4 months after surgery from causes unrelated to the fracture itself (acute myocardial infarct in the first case and complications following a cerebral ischemic attack sustained 43 days postoperatively in the second case). The patient who died at 4 months had documented bone healing on X-ray examination, 10 weeks after surgery. Two other patients had been lost to follow-up after bone healing had been documented, and could not be assessed clinically at follow-up. The results on 28 patients representing 28 fractures could be assessed with clinical and radiological data at follow-up. One patient presented a hardware breakage, needing reoperation. Among 32 initial cases, a minimal-invasive approach was performed 28 times. Exposure of the fracture site was performed four times. In one case was on an open fracture. The reduction was performed through the wound. In two cases the operating surgeon choose to manage the reduction with no further justification. In the last case open reduction was done because of technical difficulties. In the postoperative period, weight bearing up to pain threshold was allowed and performed in 25 cases. Weight bearing was forbidden for 6 weeks in four cases, corresponding to the earliest cases. Partial weight bearing up to 20 kilograms was recommended three times for compound fractures. Four cases had a complicated evolution. We found: 1 postoperative infection of the operative site, due to meticillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus; infection was treated with hardware removal, lavage and antibiotherapy. One compartment syndrome. One non-union, with no sign of infection. One hardware breakage 6 weeks after surgery ( Radiologically, the mean time to consolidation was 9 weeks (from 6 to 12 weeks). Excluding the patient died 4 days after surgery, 31 cases of tibial shaft fracture were treated with locking plates. Out of these, 29 fractures united (93,5%) without any further intervention to promote bone healing. No malrotation was diagnosed on clinical examination at follow-up. Radiographic examination at consolidation showed a valgus deviation of more than 5° in six cases out of 29 (5 to 12°). Malunion occurred in one proximal tibial shaft fracture and in five distal tibial shaft fractures. Deformations observed at consolidation were already present immediately postoperatively and did not increase despite weight bearing. No cases out of these with minimal-invasive approach, showed postoperative displacement, despite immediate weight bearing. All the four cases united uneventfully. No malunion in the sagittal plan were found at follow-up. The cases of plating osteosynthesis of the tibial shaft reported in this series involved mostly particular indications, namely proximal or distal diaphyseal fractures known to be difficult to treat with the standard nailing technique. Plating was used only once as a first choice, when treating mid-shaft fractures: in one open fracture (choice of the operating surgeon). The experience of treating complex tibial fracture has been reported by Phisitkul et al. Our series is original, when considering the postoperative rehabilitation regimen in use. Weight bearing up to pain threshold was allowed in 27 cases out of 32 (80%). Weight bearing was allowed because the locking plate system that was used acts as a monobloc construct, ending up in a true internal fixator with three anchorages per screw (two cortices and the plate), as described by Perren In the whole of the series, there was one mechanical failure, with breakage of the plate six weeks postoperatively, weight bearing having been allowed immediately after surgery. This breakage was caused by a fatigue fracture of the hardware, due to imbalance of the strain applied to the plate. Indeed, this was a compound, mid-shaft fracture with a fragmented wedge (42B3). The construct obtained in this case was not mechanically satisfactory: a notable gap between the fracture line and the nearest screws on each side of the fracture left a weakness zone at the level of the fracture ( The minimal-invasive approach allowed in theory to combine the principles of a stable construct to a closed reduction with conservation of the haematoma. However, we report 1 nonunion in our series (3,6%). Hasenboehler et al. The main factor that led us to use locking plates to treat fractures of the tibial shaft was the difficulty in controlling the reduction of the proximal or distal fractures with intramedullary nailing. Radiographic results that we report did not meet our expectations. Our series included six cases (18,8%) with valgus mal-alignment exceeding 5°. In the CECOP study Osteosynthesis by means of locking plates and a minimal-invasive approach is demanding and requires the mastering of the implant and its biomechanics. Conversely to what was noted by Hasenboehler et al. Radiological results we report led us to be cautious and proved the necessity of rigorous technique. Plating osteosynthesis did not prove superior to nailing in the treatment of tibial shaft fractures, when considering the quality of reduction obtained radiographically with comparable results. However, using this system can allow early weightbearing within a pain-free range; and in association with minimal-invasive approach, this might be beneficial related to the time to consolidation. P. Adam and M. Ehlinger: consulting for Synthes. F. Bonnomet: none.