Collaborative studies of Chinese workers, using over four decades of dust monitoring data, are being conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and Tongji Medical University in China. The goal of these projects is to establish exposure–response relationships for the development of diseases such as silicosis or lung cancer in cohorts of pottery and mine workers. It is necessary to convert Chinese dust measurements to respirable silica measurements in order to make results from the Chinese data comparable to other results in the literature.
                  This article describes the development of conversion factors and estimates of historical respirable crystalline silica exposure for Chinese workers. Ambient total dust concentrations (n>17000) and crystalline silica concentrations (n=347) in bulk dust were first gathered from historical industrial hygiene records. Analysis of the silica content in historical bulk samples revealed no trend from 1950 up to the present. During 1988–1989, side-by-side airborne dust samples (n=143 pairs) were collected using nylon cyclones and traditional Chinese samplers in 20 metal mines and nine pottery factories in China. These data were used to establish conversion factors between respirable crystalline silica concentrations and Chinese total dust concentrations. Based on the analysis of the available evidence, conversion factors derived from the 1988–1989 sampling campaign are assumed to apply to other time periods in this paper. The conversion factors were estimated to be 0.0143 for iron/copper, 0.0355 for pottery factories, 0.0429 for tin mines, and 0.0861 for tungsten mines. Conversion factors for individual facilities within each industry were also calculated. Analysis of variance revealed that mean conversion factors are significantly different among facilities within the iron/copper industry and within the pottery industry. The relative merits of using facility-specific conversion factors, industry-wide conversion factors, or a weighted average of the two are discussed. The exposure matrix of the historical Chinese total dust concentrations was multiplied by these conversion factors to obtain an exposure matrix of historical respirable crystalline silica concentrations.According to a 1988 report from the Chinese Academy of Preventive Medicine, the prevalence of pneumoconiosis in China was over 314 000 in 1986 ( Dust monitoring records at 20 metal mines and nine pottery factories in five provinces of south central China were collated and merged into a Chinese total dust exposure matrix based on facility, job title, and calendar year. Approximately 70 000 workers were employed between January 1, 1972 and December 31, 1974 at these mines and factories. The exposure matrix was so constructed that the lifetime dust exposures for workers who ever worked in these facilities can be determined if their work histories are known. This matrix was based on the original job–exposure matrix developed by US standards were promulgated after studies, conducted by the US Public Health Service in 1929 among granite workers, established a connection between dust exposure and the debilitating dust disease known as silicosis ( Conversion factors were also developed to convert the earlier particle-count exposure limits to exposure limits based on respirable mass ( To interpret the Chinese total dust exposure measurements in terms of respirable crystalline silica concentrations as measured in US workplaces, conversion factors are needed. The exposure–response relationship should be established in terms of respirable crystalline silica, so the results of this study can be compared to the results of other studies. It is also necessary to express the exposure variable in terms of respirable crystalline silica concentrations in order to use the results of Chinese-based studies to judge the appropriateness of current respirable crystalline silica standards in the United States. During 1988–1989, airborne dust samples were collected on the same work shifts using nylon cyclones and the traditional Chinese samplers at selected locations in 20 metal mines and nine pottery factories in China. Both types of samples were analyzed gravimetrically. The cyclone samples were also analyzed for crystalline silica by X-ray diffraction (XRD) ( In applying conversion factors derived from the 1988–1989 measurements to other time periods, it would be helpful if historical data on the crystalline silica content and size distribution of airborne particles were available for trend analysis. But they are not. However, data on the crystalline silica content of bulk dust are available for tin mining, tungsten mining, and pottery industries. Therefore, historical percent crystalline silica contents in bulk samples from these sources were collated and analyzed by industry, facility, job title, and time period. These analyses were conducted to help answer questions such as whether job title, facility, industry, and/or time-specific conversion factors should be developed. This paper describes our proposed conversion factors between Chinese traditional dust samples and current respirable crystalline silica measurements, based on the special 1988–1989 sampling survey. The conversion factor is the ratio of respirable crystalline silica concentrations obtained from each cyclone sample to the paired total dust concentrations measured by the Chinese airborne dust sampler during the special 1988–1989 sampling survey. The conversion factor may be estimated for a given level of specificity, either by industry or by facility within industry. More specific estimates are based on smaller sample sizes and hence are associated with more random error while less specific estimates are associated with more systematic error. We chose a method to determine the best level of specificity for the conversion factor, based on minimizing the estimated mean square error. In related work, factors to convert Chinese total dust to respirable dust without regard to chemical (crystalline silica) content are described in a separate paper ( Chinese industrial hygienists have been measuring and recording workers' environmental exposures to airborne dust and silica since the 1950s. The total dust level was measured in dusty work areas wherever silica exposure was expected. Each facility kept good records of the dust monitoring data, worker employment history, and medical information. All available industrial hygiene records starting in the 1950s were reviewed for total dust concentrations. From 1950 to 1986, concentrations of total dust were averaged over three year intervals for each job title. Exposure levels for total dust were summarized every year from 1986 to 1992. Exposure levels before 1950 were estimated from the monitoring data for 1950. Exposure indices were then created based on facility, job title, and calendar year. Approximately 50% of the facility/job title/calendar year combinations of the job–exposure matrix were estimated based on direct monitoring data. The others were estimated by using monitoring data for similar jobs, or data for the same job at different time periods, with adjustment for other historical exposure information and task description of the job title. To do this, consensus estimates were made by industrial hygiene experts, public health doctors, safety engineers, samplers, and local supervisors, based on the history of control measures, major changes in technical processes in the mines, and comparisons with the other jobs. This matrix is a further development of the job–exposure matrix developed by Although the number of measurements was limited, crystalline silica content was measured for various jobs in most of the facilities as early as 1959 and up to 1993. To determine historical crystalline silica content, bulk (settled) dust samples were collected by brushing the dust into a small polyethylene bottle and analyzed by phosphoric acid gravimetry as will be described later. During the special 1988–1989 sampling survey, three sampling sites were chosen in each of the 29 mines or facilities. Each station was sampled for two days. First, each of the three sampling sites was chosen to be representative of a distinct exposure zone. For example, the sites chosen in mining might represent ore extraction, ore transportation, and crushing or bagging. In pottery factories, the three chosen sites were usually allocated to raw material preparations, molding and forming, and glazing final finish. Second, preference was given to sampling sites that were previously sampled under the Chinese national dust monitoring program and that were at locations which were representative of high, medium, and low dust exposures. During the special 1988–1989 sampling survey, the dust levels were measured at each sampling site during the same shift using two instruments: the 10-mm nylon cyclone and the Chinese dust sampler. The cyclone was operated at 1.7 l./min to collect full-shift time-weighted average respirable dust levels ( Of the 23 cyclone samples taken from iron/copper mines, 20 samples did not have detectable respirable crystalline silica mass on the filters, i.e., the silica mass was less than the limit of detection (LOD=0.015 mg) reported by the laboratory where the samples were analyzed. About 40% of the cyclone samples collected at pottery factories, tin and tungsten mines had silica mass less than the LOD. The Chinese dust sampler (Model FC-2, Wuhan Analytical Instrument Company, Wuhan, China) has an open face 40-mm polytetra-chloroethylene filter (pore size 1.2–1.5 μm, thickness of 0.1 mm) and is battery operated ( During the special 1988–1989 sampling survey, bulk dust samples were also collected at each sampling site and analyzed by phosphoric acid gravimetry. The percent crystalline silica was estimated using a form of the Talvitie method ( The conversion factor between Chinese traditional dust samples and current respirable crystalline silica measurements was the ratio of respirable crystalline silica concentration (CS) obtained from each NIOSH cyclone sample to the paired total dust concentration (CTD) measured by the Chinese airborne dust sampler during the special 1988–1989 sampling survey. The respirable crystalline silica concentration converted from the Chinese total dust concentration was equivalent to a full-shift, time-weighted-average concentration for the actual work-shift duration on that day. The concentration in the historical total dust exposure matrix was multiplied by the conversion factor to obtain the concentrations in the historical respirable crystalline silica exposure matrix. Since most work shifts in these industries in China were shorter than 8 h, these concentrations will have to be adjusted, when 8-h time-weighted-average concentrations are needed for comparison with US standards. We considered the calculation of conversion factors at two levels of specificity, industry-wide factors and facility-specific factors. They are not equally accurate at any given facility. Assuming that there are differences in silica dust composition between the various facilities within an industry, the accuracy for a given facility, resulting from a given level of specificity, will be a combination of the bias resulting from the use of data that are not reflective of the silica dust composition at that facility and random sampling error (which is larger for smaller samples). Generally speaking, it would be expected that a facility-specific conversion factor would have smaller bias but greater variability, due to its smaller sample size, than an industry-wide factor. The development of facility-specific and industry-wide conversion factors was somewhat similar to the approach used by We calculated the variances of the facility-specific and industry-wide conversion factors using formulas similar to those that had been used by Like Seixas In addition to conversion factors based on facility-specific or industry-wide samples, intermediate estimates based on some combination of those may also be formed. The simplest of such combinations are linear combinations, in effect weighted averages, where the conversion factor has the following form: Each industry's percent of crystalline silica in bulk samples was tested for unspecified differences between years, for a historical trend, and for a difference between the years 1988 and 1989 and all earlier years. The models used fixed-effect predictors for the year the data were collected: a class variable for year in the first model, a numerical variable for year in the second model, and an indicator variable for whether or not the data had been collected in 1988–1989 for the third model. Facility (the specific mine or pottery factory at which the measurements were made) and job title by facility were included as random effects. The response variable was percent crystalline silica in bulk dust. A comparison was made between the Talvitie method applied to bulk dust and X-ray diffraction applied to airborne dust collected in the cyclone. The comparisons were carried out by a paired Conversion factors were tested for differences between industries and between facilities within industry. The predictors for this model were class variables for industry and facility. Industry was taken to be a main fixed effect and facility was a random effect nested within industry. For the purposes of this test an individual conversion factor was calculated from each observation. Because the data were markedly right-skewed, they were log-transformed for the analysis. Tukey's test ( An exposure matrix based on facility, job title, and calendar year was constructed using historical Chinese total dust data from ongoing joint NIOSH–Chinese epidemiological studies to quantitatively assess the exposure–response relationship for the development of silicosis. The matrix has a total of 17 632 historical Chinese total dust estimates and consists of 19 columns (calendar-year periods) and 928 rows (facility–job titles combinations). Some of the cells were estimated based on as many as 36 direct measurements (monthly monitoring data for three-year intervals). The numbers of facility–job title combinations were 172, 124, 96, and 263 for iron/copper mines, pottery factories, tin mines, and tungsten mines, respectively. The historical percent crystalline silica contents in bulk samples were first analyzed by industry and facility and are summarized in    The average Chinese total dust concentrations were 6.1, 5.1, 2.9, and 1.9 mg/m  For most of the facilities the use of a facility-specific conversion factor resulted in a smaller mean squared error than the use of an industry-wide conversion factor, but for seven facilities the mean square error was somewhat smaller when the industry-wide conversion factor was used. They were facility 36 of the iron/copper mining industry, facilities 21, 25, and 27 of the pottery industry, and facilities 14, 17, and 18 of the tungsten mining industry. For these seven facilities, the ratio of the facility-specific mean square error to the industry-wide mean square error ranged from 1.04 to 6.01. It was greater than 2 for four facilities: pottery factory number 25 (2.38), pottery factory number 27 (2.63), tungsten mine number 17 (2.61) and tungsten mine number 18 (6.01). Of the seven facilities, copper mine number 36 had the lowest ratio. The historical total dust exposure matrix was multiplied by the best-linear-combination conversion factors to obtain the respirable crystalline silica concentration matrix for all facilities except for those where the MSE could not be estimated. For those facilities (i.e., tin mines 41 and 42) the industry-wide conversion factor was used instead. The average respirable crystalline silica concentration of all facility–job title combinations was calculated for each calendar-year period by industry and is plotted against the ending year of each period ( In applying conversion factors, derived from the 1988–1989 measurements to other time periods, it would be helpful if historical data on the crystalline silica content and size distribution of airborne particles were available for trend analysis. But they were not. As a surrogate, available historical data on the crystalline silica content of bulk dust were analyzed and discussed. Possibly due to small sample sizes and large variability in some calendar years, there is no statistical indication of the need for factors based on time-specific percent crystalline silica content. Based on this analysis of the available evidence, conversion factors derived from the 1988–1989 sampling campaign are assumed to apply to other time periods in this paper. In deriving conversion factors, distribution of particle size is an important factor to be considered. The mechanisms of dust generation producing a wide range of particle sizes may change over time due to new methods of production or installation of ventilation controls. The distribution of particle size is also expected to vary among job tasks, facilities, and industries. The conversion factors only took into account the variation among job tasks, facilities, and industries because cyclone (i.e., respirable) samples were collected at three work stations at each facility. There are insufficient historical particle size data to allow an analysis of whether size distributions changed from the 1950s to the 1990s. Those using these conversion factors in epidemiological or other studies should evaluate information about changes in work practices and conditions before deciding whether to apply the conversion factors from the 1988–1989 measurements to other time periods. It has been reported that the percentage of quartz in bulk or settled dust samples is usually greater than that in the smaller respirable-size dust samples ( An important issue that must be considered in developing and using measures such as percent crystalline silica in dust and conversion factors is the most appropriate level of specificity. This paper considers whether the percent crystalline silica for 1988–1989 can reasonably be applied to earlier years, or whether a time-varying percent crystalline silica measure would be preferable. It also considers two levels of specificity, facility-specific and industry-wide, for the conversion factor, plus a linear combination of the two. The level of specificity that is appropriate for percent crystalline silica or a conversion factor depends on a number of factors including the quantity and accuracy of the data, the reasonableness of assuming that applying a broader level of specificity will still result in a useful estimate, and the statistical properties of an epidemiological or other model that makes use of a given percent crystalline silica estimate or estimates or a given conversion factor or set of conversion factors. Given the limited amounts of percent crystalline silica data available for the years other than 1988–1989, it is not feasible to make use of a year-by-year industry-specific percent crystalline silica content, so the questions considered in this regard were whether the 1988–1989 measurements could reasonably be considered typical for earlier data and whether a linear trend exists for any of the industries. Both of these questions were tested statistically, along with an additional test for unspecified differences between calendar years, for each industry for which such a test could be made. As there were no statistically significant differences, it was concluded that the 1988–1989 percent crystalline silica content could be considered typical for years prior to that. Industry-wide conversion factors are averages of the facility-specific conversion factors for a given industry. The facility-specific factors may be averaged in a number of ways, one obvious choice being between a weighted or unweighted average. This paper proposes the use of the mean square error as one possible criterion for deciding between facility-specific and industry-wide conversion factors. The mean square error for a given facility is the mean squared difference between the individual measurements of the conversion factor at that facility and the final estimate of the conversion factor that is used for that facility. It can be decomposed into a term for the sample variance and a term for the squared bias, if any, that is associated with a particular estimate of the conversion factor. The motivation for its use is that, in choosing between facility-specific versus industry-wide conversion factors, we are in effect choosing between greater random error on the one hand and the addition of bias on the other. Although data from a particular facility may suggest that the facility is atypical for the industry, the data may be of such poor quality as a result of excessive variability and small sample size that that conclusion is suspect. Using the mean square error criterion, a facility-specific conversion factor will be used if it is similar to the conversion factors for other facilities in the same industry or if its difference from the industry norm is well supported by the data, but not if it is both atypical and unreliable. Of the facilities considered in this study, seven have mean square errors that are somewhat larger for facility-specific conversion factors than for industry-wide conversion factors. One of these, facility 18 of the tungsten mining industry, has a mean square error for the industry-wide conversion factor that is only a small fraction of its mean square errors for its facility-specific conversion factors. Additionally, three other facilities, 25 and 27 of the pottery industry and facility 17 of the tungsten mining industry, have industry-wide mean square errors that are less than half of their facility-specific mean square errors, and three others, facility 36 of the iron/copper mining industry, facility 21 of the pottery industry, and facility 14 of the tungsten mining industry, have industry-wide mean square errors that are less than their facility-specific mean square errors. Since their conversion factors are both atypical and unreliable, application of the mean square error criterion would result in using the industry-wide rather than the facility-specific conversion factor. In addition to the facility-specific and industry-wide conversion factors, a linear combination of the two was also proposed. Since the linear combination minimizes the mean square error, a researcher who was choosing conversion factors from these three on the basis of the smallest mean square error would always choose the best linear combination. That is not to say that the mean square error is the only criterion that can be applied to choosing among different levels of specificity. Application of the mean square error principle results in more reliable conversion factor estimates at individual facilities, at least by one measure of reliability, but reliability may not be a researcher's only concern. Among the possible drawbacks to its use is the fact that statistical models using mixtures or linear combinations of industry-wide and facility-specific conversion factors have more complicated variance structure than statistical models that use either a common conversion factor for all facilities or else facility-specific conversion factors for all facilities. Then, too, some researchers may feel that the introduction of additional bias to the conversion factor estimate is unacceptable regardless of any accompanying reduction in the random sampling error. The average respirable crystalline silica concentrations for iron/copper mines and pottery factories remained relatively constant over time as seen from The relationship between cumulative risk of silicosis among Chinese tin miners and cumulative Chinese total dust exposures are reported in another paper ( Mention of a product or company name does not constitute endorsement by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. The authors would like to extend their appreciation to Drs Kyle Steenland, Michael D. Attfield, Dan S. Sharp, and Ms Andrea Mannetje (IARC) for their valuable review comments and Ms Patti Stewart for her assistance in typing the document.