The microstructural contributes to understand the strengthening and elongation mechanism in Lanthanum-doped Titanium-Zirconium-Molybdenum alloy. Lanthanum oxide particles not only act as heterogeneous nucleation core, but also act as the second phase to hinder the grain growth during sintering crystallization. The molybdenum substrate formed sub-grain under the effect of second phase when the alloy rolled to plate.Molybdenum has been widely used in the form of Titanium-Zirconium-Molybdenum (TZM) alloy To take advantage of these desirable properties, we designed a new type of Lanthanum-doped TZM (La-TZM) alloy in the form of a sheet by powder metallurgy and rolling which has good mechanical properties The chemical compositions of the TZM alloy and the La-TZM alloy are listed in  The tensile strength and elongation of the La-TZM sintering blank were measured to be 14.1% and 20.5% higher than the TZM sintering blank. Similarly, these properties of the La-TZM plate were increased by 40% and 26% respectively, compared to the TZM plate The powder TZM alloy undergoes a series of physical and chemical changes during the sintering process: evaporation of water, removal of adsorbed gas, stress relieving, reduction in oxide powder particles surface, inter-particle mass transfer, recrystallization, and grain growth. The overall effect is to increase the contact surface between the crystal particles, causing the pores to shrink or disappear. The microstructure matrix of the TZM alloy exhibits recovery, recrystallization and grain growth in the sintering process   The second (particulate) phase can significantly improve the strength of the alloy and reduce the detrimental effects on the plasticity and toughness. As seen in   Lanthanum oxide particles not only act as heterogeneous nucleation core, but also act as the second phase particles to hinder the grain growth during the sintering crystallization, and result in grain refinement. The mean grain size was reduced from 25.64 to 14.26 Lanthanum oxide produces ‘dispersion strengthening’ effect. During rolling, lanthanum oxide causes the dislocation to pin and tangle, resulting in multiple dislocations and generation of sub-grains, further strengthening the material. The authors offer thanks to Dr. Ajit Godbole at the University of Wollongong for discussions on this research. This work is financial supported by the