The current recovery technique of Sc was complicated and the chemical consumption was high. This was due to the low content of Sc in resources and the difficulty of stripping. In this research, the isooctanol was added into the 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (P507) extraction system to reduce the extraction and improve the stripping of Sc. The maximum stripping ratio of Sc from loaded organic phase by sulfuric acid can increase from 10% (without isooctanol) to 99% (with 15 vol% isooctanol). In the extraction test of the simulated red mud leaching liquor, the separation factors between Sc and Zr, Sc and Ti are 36 and 350, separately. At the same time, other metals are almost not extracted. The high selectivity and stripping of Sc suggest that the P507 with isooctanol extraction system can be applied in the practical Sc recovery process.Scandium (Sc) is a member of the rare earth elements (REEs), along with lanthanides and yttrium. The low content of Sc indicates the recovery technique must have a high selectivity towards Sc. In this case, most of the studies have focused on the hydrometallurgy process. To develop a greener recovery process, the balance between extraction and striping should be considered to reduce the chemical consumption in this process. To achieve this goal, one way is to use extractant with weaker extraction ability towards Sc. Wang et al. studied the extraction of Sc by D2EHPA, 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (P507, HEHEHP, Ionquest801) and di-2,4,4-trimethylpentyl phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272). The P507 (>93.0% purity) was supplied by Luoyang Aoda Chemical Co., Ltd. and was diluted with the mixture of isooctanol and heptane. The content of isooctanol mentioned in this paper referred to the volume fraction of the diluent. The stock solution of Sc was prepared by dissolving its oxide (>99.9%) into concentrated sulfuric acid. The stock solutions of other metals were prepared by dissolving their hydroxides or sulfates into sulfuric acid. All the other chemicals were of analytical grade. The simulated sulfuric acid leaching liquor of red mud was prepared by mixing the sulfate solutions of various metals. The element composition of the simulated leaching liquor referred to a Bayer process red mud concentrate ( The acidity of the aqueous phase and concentration of P507 were measured by NaOH titration. The aqueous metal concentrations were determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometers (ICP-OES, Thermo iCAP 6000). The metal concentrations of the loaded organic phase were calculated by mass balance. The Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) spectra were measured with a Bruker Vertex 70 FTIR spectrometer (Germany). The extraction equilibrium experiments of single metal by P507 with different isooctanol content were carried out at 25 ± 1 °C with an organic/aqueous phase (O/A) ratio of 1:1 vol/vol (5 mL of each phase). After shaking for 30 min at 210 r/min, the mixture was centrifuged for 5 min at 3000 r/min for phase separation. In the determination of the loading capacity of Sc by P507 with different isooctanol content, the extractant was repeatedly contacted with sever all equal volume (30 mL) fresh Sc solutions in the separation funnel for 30 min at 25 ± 1 °C, 260 r/min by a separator funnel shaker (Wiggens WS-1, German), until the concentration of Sc in the raffinate kept unchanged. These Sc loaded organic phases were also used in the FT-IR analysis. The stripping experiment was conducted by contacting Sc loaded organic phase with stripping agents and carried out at 25 ± 1 °C with an organic/aqueous phase (O/A) ratio of 1:1 vol/vol (5 mL of each phase). The operation and conditions of the phase mixing and separation were the same as the extraction equilibrium experiment. The extraction of the simulated sulfuric acid leaching liquor of red mud by P507 with 15% isooctanol was carried out at 25 ± 1 °C in the separation funnel for 30 min with an O/A ratio of 1:1 vol/vol (20 mL of each phase). The extraction efficiency ( The effects of acidity and P507 concentration on the extraction of Sc in different isooctanol contents were studied by the extraction equilibrium experiments. The results ( The addition of isooctanol also influences the loading capacity of Sc by P507. According to The extraction equation in the cation exchange stage can be determined by the conventional slope analysis method ( From Another reason is the coordination of isooctanol with P507, which could destabilize the structure of the complex Sc(HA The stripping of metal ion from the organic phase could be regarded as the reverse reaction of the extraction to some extent, which suggests the stripping of Sc by acid could be improved by the addition of isooctanol. As can be seen in As revealed in To test the selectivity of P507 with isooctanol towards the Sc among the components of the Red Mud leaching liquor, the extraction of solo metal was carried out. As illustrated in To develop a high-efficiency process for the recovery of Sc, an extraction system based on the addition of isooctanol was studied. The following conclusion can be drawn from the results. The extraction of Sc from sulfuric acid solution by P507 undergoes two stages with different mechanisms, the cation exchange in low acidity and solvent coordination in high acidity. In the cation exchange stage, the Sc reacts with (HA) The stripping ratio of Sc from loaded organic phase is increased with the increasing of isooctanol content. The maximum St can be greatly improved from 10% (by P507 without isooctanol) to 99% (by P507 with 15 vol% isooctanol). Compared with nitric acid and hydrochloric acid, the sulfuric acid has a better stripping ratio of Sc. With the addition of isooctanol, the extraction efficiency of Zr and Ti are reduced, too. As a result, the separation values among Sc, Zr and Ti are increased with the increase of isooctanol content. The maximum separation factors of Sc/Zr and Sc/Ti are 34 and 494 at aqueous acidity of 1 mol/L with 15 vol% isooctanol. This acidity is close to the actual leaching liquor of secondary resources like red mud. The extraction of simulated red mud leaching liquor by P507 with 15% isooctanol was tested. When the O:A phase ratio is 1:1 and the H The separation factors between Scand other metals and the stripping ratio of Sc on the loading organic phase are both high in the P507 with isooctanol extraction system. The acid stripping procedure avoids the loss of Scand extractant in the NaOH stripping procedure and affords a continuous multi-stage extraction and stripping process, which are in favor of automation and the scale-up of the recovery process. This extraction system exhibits application potential in the practical Sc recovery process. Further studies can be focused on the optimization of the actual process parameters.