The electrochemical response of massive chalcopyrite electrodes bioleached with mesophile microorganisms in both presence and absence of Ag(I) ions was studied using linear and cyclic voltammetry. The electrolyte employed for the electrochemical tests was the medium used to bioleaching the electrodes (3.0 g/L (NH4)2·SO4, 0.5 g/L K2HPO4, 0.5 g/L MgSO4·7H2O and 0.1 g/L Ca(NO3)2).
                  The results showed small differences in voltagramms carried out in presence and absence of Ag(I): In bioleached electrodes tested in presence of Ag(I) ions, the anodic and cathodic current signals were bigger than when Ag(I) ions were not present. Moreover, the passivation of chalcopyrite occurred at two different times: First, the passivation was observed in the bioleached electrodes in absence of Ag(I) and after in the bioleached electrodes in presence of Ag(I). The pre-wave observed in the anodic dissolution of the chalcopyrite was not seen in the bioleached electrodes in absence of Ag(I) ions, but in the electrode treated with bacteria in presence of Ag(I) ions an increase in current signals was observed.Chalcopyrite is an extremely important copper mineral and demands special technical consideration. Although it is the most abundant copper sulfide mineral, it is one of the most difficult minerals to treat by hydrometallurgical routes The interest in the electrochemistry of sulfide minerals stems largely from the fact that their dissolution in oxidizing solutions has been shown to occur by an electrochemical mechanism Since copper dissolution from chalcopyrite is the primary step in many hydrometallurgical processes for copper extraction, it is important to establish what determines this slow rate, especially from the viewpoint of the anodic process The application of bioleaching processes for copper sulfide ores has been practiced for decades. Ten copper bioleach operations have been commissioned since 1980 The bioleaching of sulfide minerals such as chalcopyrite, involves electrochemical and chemical reactions of the mineral with the leach liquor and the microorganisms In an attempt to increase the chalcopyrite dissolution rate, researchers have been investigating the subject of the catalytic effects of some metallic ions on the chalcopyrite bioleaching. The silver ion has showed a major catalytic effect on the chalcopyrite bioleaching Recently, the technique of cyclic and linear voltamperometry has been used with some success to study reactions on the chalcopyrite surface The results obtained in linear and cyclic voltamperometry tests and open circuit potential measurements ( Working electrodes were prepared from natural chalcopyrite obtained from Zacatecas, México. X-ray diffraction analysis showed a pure and homogeneous phase. Samples were cut with a work surface of approximately 0.4 cm The cultures of mesophilic bacteria used were obtained from the native microflore of a chalcopyrite concentrate adapted by successive passes in 9 K medium free of chloride ions (3.0 g/L (NH Massive chalcopyrite electrodes were bioleached in shake flasks in an orbital incubator with temperature and stirring speed controlled at 35 °C and 150 rpm, respectively. The tests were made introducing the corresponding electrode with 90 mL of 9 K medium, 10 mL of inoculum, 5 g of concentrate and Ag Periodic measurements of pH, redox potentials, ORP, bacterial growth and metallic values in solution (Cu and Fe A three-electrode system was used. The cell consisted of the CuFeS The Prior to bioleaching the electrodes, cyclic voltamperometry tests were carried out to characterize them. Although small differences are appreciated between the two voltamperogramms, it can be said that both curves present a similar behavior. In the anodic scan, previous to massive dissolution of chalcopyrite, it can be seen a pre-wave (A1), which has been reported by others authors Yin et al. Studies made by Dutrizac Qualitative analysis of copper in solution during anodic scans did not show evidences of either Cu At potential values > For potential values > Observations made with an scanning electron microscope (SEM) revealed the presence of a large quantity of S° on the chalcopyrite surface. Therefore, Eq. In the inverse scan, two signals are observed (C1 and C2) near to 200 and 115 mV respectively. According to Holliday and Richmond However, in the present study, since magnetic stirring was used, such reactions (Eqs. Due to the large number of phases present in the Cu–Fe–S system, there are many possible intermediate phases that can be produced during the chalcopyrite reduction At approximately − Finally, at potential values < Biegler and Horne According to Biegler and Swift  As can be seen in On the other hand, in bioleaching systems with Ag(I) ions,  As can be seen, the changes in the electrochemical behavior of the electrode at different bioleaching times is evident. At 7 days of pretreatment, there is a considerable increase in both anodic and cathodic processes. The pre-wave in the anodic scan disappeared totally. The next voltamperogramms (at 20 and 49 days of bacterial pretreatment) showed a passive chalcopyrite surface attributed to the formation a protective layer on the surface.  The results show a different behavior in both the anodic and cathodic processes. Voltamperogramms at 0 and 7 days, This results explain partially the differences in copper extraction by using mesophilic microorganisms in absence and presence of Ag(I) ions in bioleaching systems, The passive layer created on the chalcopyrite surface is formed at different times. This film appeared first in systems without a catalytic agent causing the extraction process to stop. In the other case, with a catalytic agent, the passive layer is formed after 20 days letting more copper to go into solution. The electrochemical techniques (LV and CV) employed in this study were useful for obtaining information on the chalcopyrite bioleaching process. All the massive chalcopyrite electrodes used in this work showed a reproducible and reliable electrochemical behavior. The bioleaching of chalcopyrite was favored by the addition of Ag(I) ions. In systems without Ag(I) ions, the process of chalcopyrite dissolution stopped before reaching 20 days of bioleaching. In systems with Ag(I) ions, the process of chalcopyrite dissolution lasted more than 20 days. The dissolution of chalcopyrite involves many intermediate reactions and therefore is a complex process. One of the authors, A.L.J., wishes to thank CONACyT and DGEP-UNAM for the economic financing of the doctorate studies. The authors want to thank DGAPA-UNAM for the financial support of IN210000 and IN224703 research projects.