The 15th International Plansee Seminar was held in Reutte, Austria from 28th May–1st June, 2001 in the premises of Walter-Schwarzkopf-Haus of Plansee Holding AG. This series of world class international seminar was started by Professor Paul Schwarzkopf in 1951, who was the founder of Metallwerk Plansee Plant, situated in the beautiful valley of Tyrol in Austria. The 15th Plansee Seminar was convened under the general theme ‘Powder Metallurgical High Performance Materials’. Under this broadened perspective the seminar tried to look beyond the refractory metals and cemented carbides which remain at its focus, to novel classes of materials, such as intermetallic compounds with potential for high temperature applications. The seminar started with the introductory welcome speech of Dr Michael Schwarzkopf, the chairman of the Executive Board of Plansee Holding AG, who is the grandson of late Prof. Paul Schwarzkopf and son of late Mr Walter Schwarzkopf. The occasion was graced by Mrs Walter Schwarzkopf also. In all there were 504 registrations. The representations from various countries (35 in all) were as follows: Germany (112); Austria (109); USA (50); Japan, Russia (24 each); France (22); Peoples Republic of China, Sweden (15 each); UK (14); Ukraine (11); Belgium, South Korea (10 each); Israel, Italy (9 each); Czech Republic, Romania, The Netherlands (8 each); Spain (7); Switzerland (5); Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Hungary, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, South Africa (3 each); Chile, Denmark, India, Poland (2 each); Finland, Ghana, Hong Kong, Latvia, Serbia (1 each). The programme constituted of 86 oral presentations (in ten lecture sessions) and 158 poster presentations (in five poster sessions). In order to provide more time for presentations, for the first time the parallel sessions were introduced; between two areas ‘P/M Metals’ and ‘P/M Hard Materials’. This no doubt had its own distraction as most of the audience dealing with refractory metals were also interested in hard materials too. The opening lecture was delivered by Prof. Dr Karl Lackner of EFDA, Garching, Germany on ‘ITER and the fusion reactor: the status and the challenge to technology’. Various oral sessions were on the following themes: High Performance P/M Metals in Power Engineering (six papers) High Performance P/M Metals in Heat Management (five papers) Novel Refractory Metals and Alloys (twelve papers) High Performance P/M Metals in Lighting Technology (six papers) High Performance P/M Metals in Transportation (four papers) Ultrafine-grained and Nanocrystalline Hard Materials (ten papers) Novel Concepts for Hard Materials (twelve papers) Hard Metals with Optimized Properties (nine papers) Cutting Tools for Extreme conditions (ten papers) General Topics (twelve papers) In addition there were poster sessions related to themes ‘High Performance P/M Metals’ (60 papers), ‘Hard Materials’ (60 papers) and ‘General Topics’ (37 papers), respectively. The following were the keynote lectures delivered during the 5-day period of the seminar: W–Cu Gradient Materials — Processing, Properties and Application possibilities Dr Ing. Marion Joensson, University of Technology Dresden, Institute of Material Science, Dresden, Germany Materials Requirements for Thermal Management in Wireless Communication Dr Mali Mahalingam, Motorola Inc., Tempe, USA Electrical Discharge Light Sources: A Challenge for the Future Prof. Dr Georges Zissis, CPAT-Univ. Toulouse III, Toulouse, France Design and Properties of advanced γ(TiAl) alloys Dr Fritz Appel, Institute for Materials Research, GKSS Research Centre, Geesthacht, Germany New Applications and Novel Processing of Refractory Metal Alloys Prof. Clyde L. Briant, Brown University, Division of Engineering, Providence, USA Cellular Metals — Production, Properties and Application Prof. Dr Ing. Robert F. Singer, Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg, Lehrstuhl Werkstoffkunde/Technologie der Metalle, Germany Submicron and Ultrafine Grained Hard Metals for Microdrills and Metal Cutting Inserts Dr Gerhard Gille, H.C. Starck, Goslar, Germany Hard Metals — Microstructural Design, Testing and Property Maps Dr Bryan Roebuck, NPL Materials Centre, National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, United Kingdom Properties of New WC–Co Base Hard Metal Prepared from Co Dr Kozo Kitamura, Toshiba Tungaloy Co. Ltd., Iwaki, Japan Innovative Substrates and Ultra-hard Coatings for Dry Machining of Difficult to Cut Materials Dr Sergio Durante, Centro Ricerche FIAT, Orbassano, Italy Some of the invited lectures are here briefly described. Ms Joensson (Dresden, Germany) spoke on ‘W–Cu gradient materials — processing, properties and application possibilities’. The consolidation routes were determined by the concentration areas of the gradients and encompass liquid phase sintering, pressure assisted solid state sintering and the application of coated tungsten powder and sintering additives. Prof. Briant of Brown University (USA) in his paper ‘New applications and novel processing of refractory metal alloys’ talked on the application limitations caused due to the propensity of refractory metals to oxidize and to undergo a loss of yield strength at elevated temperature, which can be mitigated after grain boundary engineering. He also spoke on the use of tantalum in the electronic industries as a diffusion barrier for copper metallization. In another keynote lecture, Dr Zissis of University of Toulouse III, France discussed the new generation of light emitting diodes producing bright colours (including white) with luminous efficiency challenging even discharge lamps. Dr F. Appel of GKSS Research Centre, Geesthacht (Germany) in the keynote lecture (co-authored by Clemens and Oehring) entitled ‘Design and properties of advanced γ(TiAl) alloys’, discussed how new compositions of alloys have been identified and are capable of carrying stresses in excess of 900 MPa at service temperatures of 700°C. The wrought alloys of this type can be an alternative to the heavier nickel based superalloys in certain ranges of stress and temperature. Dr Gille of H.C. Starck, Germany talked at length on ‘Submicron and ultrafine grained hard metals for microdrills and metal cutting inserts’. The co-authors were from Widia Valenite, HPTec GmbH and Fraunhofer Institute, Dresden (all from Germany). Combining improved pressing behaviour with proper doping and optimized processing, new applications of submicron and ultrafine hard metals could be obtained by using complex shaped metal cutting inserts. Apart from these applications, the lecture gave some insight into fundamental investigations on sintering and properties of ultrafine hard metals and showed in particular the influence of milling, doping and sintering on the properties of ultrafine hard metals. The author presented a new ultrafine WC grade showing a 0.1-μm WC intercept of a sintered WC-10 w/o Co structure and a hardness of HV Dr K. Kitamura of Toshiba Tungaloy Co. Ltd., Japan (with coauthors M. Kobayashi and K. Hayashi, the latter from the University of Tokyo, Japan) in the keynote lecture entitled ‘Properties of new WC–Co base hard metal prepared from Co The seminar proceedings were distributed to delegates in three volumes (Vol.1 High Performance P/M Metals, p.834; Vol. 2 P/M Hard Materials, p.875; Vol. 3 General Topics, p.399). The remaining 4th Vol. covering unprinted papers shall be distributed later. The Proceedings are edited by G. Kneringer, P. Rodhammer and H. Wildner. These are not for sale. In a nutshell, if there is an international conference dealing with high performance powder metallurgical materials, which stood the test of excellence during the 20th century and is going to stand the challenge of the 21st century, it is ‘PLANSEE SEMINAR’. Those who have not attended the seminar so far should try for the next after four years at Reutte, Austria.