A laboratory-scale entrained flow reactor for gasification/pyrolysis of coal and biomass has been designed and constructed at the Pennsylvania State University. The pre-experimental numerical simulations have been used as an aid in the design of the reactor as well as understanding and explaining the experimental results. Post experimental modeling of the reactor has been carried out using the CFD package ANSYS-Fluent. Results from experiments conducted with the reactor are here presented. These initial characterization activities of the entrained flow reactor are carried out at atmospheric pressure. Modeling and experiments are conducted at three different temperatures: 1573K, 1673K and 1773K. The CFD models show some particle and gas recirculation at the inlet of the reactor. The calculated residence time in the reactor is 0.5s for biomass and 0.4s for coal when the particles traveling distance is 0.65m. Tar and CO are the dominant species at 1573K in both coal and biomass conversions, however while tar reduces as the temperature increases, the CO formation increases. Fuel conversion varies significantly between coal and biomass. The minimum conversions observed during experiments were 86.7% for biomass and 56.8% for coal at 1573K. Conversion rates as high as 90.5% were observed for biomass at 1773K, while the maximum coal conversion observed was 64.0% at 1773K. The BET surface area of coal chars obtained at 1573K and 1673K was similar and higher than that of the char obtained at 1773K. This drop of surface area at 1773K has been attributed to pore coalescence, following observation of the SEM images. The surface area of biomass chars does not vary significantly. The reactivity studies conducted on the chars reveal some thermal annealing at higher temperature for coal; this occurrence is observed to be less pronounced for biomass chars.The continuous depletion of fossil fuel resources and the need to curb greenhouse gas (GHG) and pollution from fossil fuels utilization has stimulated the increasing use of biomass and opportunity fuels for power generation and fuel production. Co-firing coal and biomass has been assessed by various authors High temperature gasification is well recognized for achieving high carbon conversion and producing a high quality syngas with low methane and tar content The present reactor ( The following assumptions have been made in modeling the reactor:     One important design aspect of the entrained flow reactor was to estimate how effective the heat generated by the electrical heating elements could be retained within the reactor. In other words, how much heat is being lost from the reactor and how is the reactor shell temperature at maximum operating conditions. Solutions of this step of the design were carried out with the help of the software package Comsol, using a steady step conjugate heat transfer in the fluid (transport gas, reaction gas and purge gas) and solids (refractory-insulation, reactor tube) with surface to surface radiation between the heating elements and the inner refractory walls and outer reactor tube ( As stated earlier, modeling the reaction section of the reactor has been carried out in Ansys – Fluent, considering a 2D axisymmetric geometry and steady state for the continuous phase (gas) while the discrete phase (particles) trajectory and velocity have been calculated in a time dependent frame. The particle velocity is dictated by the gas flow rate in the reactor, which requires the continuous phase velocity to be determined. In entrained flow systems, particle flow is said to be dilute because, due to the lower volume fraction of the discrete phase compared to the gas phase, particle motion is controlled by local aerodynamic forces The steady state gas phase continuity and momentum equations that have been implemented in the 2D axisymmetric geometry are:  The particle velocity in the reactor has been determined by solving the discrete phase momentum equation: The particle velocity is solved to be  The following particle temperature equation has been solved and implemented in the CFD package Ansys-Fluent. Solution of the particle temperature equation has been implemented in a user defined function (UDF) to be compiled and loaded into Ansys-Fluent during simulation. The particle temperature equation has been developed as follows:  The term The particle residence time is a very important factor in calculating the kinetic parameters in entrained flow systems. For a particle with residence time The mean particle residence time has been calculated by All experiments have been conducted under isothermal condition; this is achieved by programming the temperature controller to deliver a certain amount of power to the Super Kanthal heating element, therefore maintaining the reactor tube temperature to a set level. Experiments have been conducted at three set temperatures: 1573 The char samples collected in the thimble filter have been subjected to various studies. The weight of tar dissolved in the solvent has been estimated using a gravimetric analysis. This analysis consists of pouring 50 Knowledge of the fuel conversion allows the estimation of the amount of gas produced during reaction A global reaction modeling scheme has been adapted throughout this study where the devolatilization reaction is assumed to take place in a single reaction converting the solid fuels into gas products and char. The fuel particle (biomass or coal) is composed of volatiles, char and ash. The initial mass of the fuel particle can therefore be expressed as the sum of these individual components as:   We can define the initial fraction of volatile in the particle as The devolatilization rate The devolatilization reaction rate is proportional to the remaining volatile in the fuel particle, therefore, Since Eq. Eqs. Eqs. Let’s define The particle density has been updated after accordingly, assuming no change in particle diameter R is the universal gas constant and The plot of Calculations give activation energies of 79080.3 The mass Real time gas analysis on the system is performed by the Agilent Micro GC 3000A. This gas chromatograph has two columns: a MolSieve 5A PLOT column and a Plot U column. Each column operates isothermally and separates the analytes from the sample into discrete peaks; these peaks are then detected with a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and the GC software identifies individual compounds by retention times according to a preset list stored within its internal library. The following analyses have been carried out on coal and biomass chars collected in the filter: Particle skeletal density (Helium density), BET surface area, SEM image analysis, Reactivity. The particle density has been measured using the Quantachrome Instruments’ Multipycnometer for skeletal (true) density analysis. The BET surface area has been carried out in the Micromeritics ASAP 2020 Surface Area and Porosity Analyzer. Liquid nitrogen at 77 In order to ensure that the solution to the model is independent to the mesh resolution, a mesh independence study has been carried out. The mesh used in the current simulation had a maximum element size of 0.001 The temperature distribution in the reactor is presented in Upon injection in the reactor, the primary gas temperature rises to approximately 1800 The particle velocity is presented in  Fuel conversion varies from 57% to 64% for coal and 87% to 91% for biomass within the three temperatures (1573 The mass fraction of gas species released during these experiments ( The mass fraction of As expected, the skeletal density of the char increases with conversion ( The plot of specific surface area change versus temperature is reported in The char conversion graphs of the reactivity studies conducted in the TGA are presented in The presence of innate recalcitrant carbon structures in coal or biomass may be responsible for the low carbon conversion sometimes observed at higher temperatures. However, there is also evidence that biomass char deactivation may also be responsible for the low carbon conversion. Various mechanisms by which char deactivation occurs have been identified. Thermal annealing also referred in the literature as thermal deactivation or graphitization is a phenomenon taking place at high temperatures where the char matrix is transformed into a highly ordered and unreactive carbon arrangement of aromatic structure. It has been found that the likelihood of char thermal annealing to occur is conditioned by the source of the char and its preparation. Guerrero et al. The implication of this analysis is far-reaching in co-firing applications, especially for pulverized systems operating at higher temperatures. Such systems should consider the drop in coal char reactivity at higher temperatures and take appropriate measures to improve the subsequent heterogeneous char gas reaction following devolatilization. Blending coal with biomass could be beneficial in this situation since the reactivity of biomass char seems to be less affected by the heat treatment temperature.  The present paper has outlined the design, operation and testing of an entrained flow reactor. CFD approaches have aided to describe the hydrodynamics and heat transfer profile in the reactor. The average coal particle residence time is estimated at 0.4