The acceptance of the first edition of our book by the CFD community has certainly been overwhelming and most welcomed. We were extremely pleased by the positive feedback received even within the short period since its publication. In responding to the numerous comments, the second edition aims to further enhance and update the fast-growing subject of CFD, including significant developments and important applications. In order not to stray away from our primary focus of offering CFD users a In the treatment of the fundamental physics of fluid flows, we have added the generic form of the equations pertaining to compressible flows, which are in retrospect an extension to the incompressible form of the equations for CFD. At the time of the writing of the first edition, we focused predominantly on the description of the most popular discretization approaches in CFD, the finite-difference and finite-volume methods. Recognizing that other discretization methods, such as the finite-element and spectral methods, are still available in the mainstream of CFD, we have provided a summary of the basic ideas underpinning the use of these methods to solve the fluid-flow equations. To reflect the iterative approach that is also commonly being adopted to solve systems of discretized equations in commercial CFD codes, we have written a section in In the first edition, we also identified a number of key sectors where CFD has been firmly established. They are aerospace, biomedical science and engineering, chemical and mineral processing, civil and environmental engineering, power generation, and sports. In this second edition, we add the application of CFD in the areas of metallurgy and nuclear safety. Considering the wide spread of CFD throughout a number of significant engineering areas, the proper handling of complex geometries becomes ever more important in view of different types of meshing approaches that can be employed. Discussions on key aspects of structured, body-fitted, and unstructured meshes have been provided within the practical guidelines of grid generation. Finally, an alternative numerical approach based on the discrete element method has been added to the growing list of advanced topics in CFD. For instructors adopting this text for use in their courses, solutions to end-of-chapter problems and a set of PowerPoint slides are available by registering at