Introduction
                  Optimal fixation for highly comminuted distal radius fractures remains a major treatment challenge for orthopaedic surgeons. Dorsal distraction plating can serve as an improved fixation technique by allowing reduction under ligamentotaxis, providing a dorsal buttress, addressing proximal comminution, and allowing for early weightbearing in polytrauma patients. The aim of this study was to review current literature regarding treatment of distal radius fractures treated with dorsal distraction plating.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a literature search in Pubmed and EMBASE databases to identify all studies analyzing use of dorsal distraction plating. Case reports, biomechanical and anatomic cadaver studies were excluded from analysis. Primary outcome measures were range of motion (ROM) at final follow up, grip strength, and radiographic parameters.
               
                  Results
                  Eight studies were included in the final analysis. Pooled mean ROM after dorsal distraction plating was found to be 47.6° of flexion, 50.5° of extension, 76.0° of pronation, and 74.2° of supination. Pooled mean grip strength was 79.1% compared to the uninjured contralateral limb. Pooled mean volar tilt was 3.6°. Overall radial height was maintained at an average of 10.5 mm with a pooled mean loss of only 3.8 mm in length. Mean radial inclination was found to be 19.4 mm with patients having a mean ulnar variance of 0.5 mm.
               
                  Discussion & conclusion
                  Treatment of comminuted intra-articular distal radius fractures with dorsal distraction plating yielded excellent outcomes with very low complication rates, and has several advantages over volar plating and/or external fixation for these fractures. Necessity of plate removal remains a negative feature of this technique.Distal radius fractures are the most common long bone fracture and the incidence appears to be increasing worldwide [ Surgical treatment for distal radius fractures varies, as there are numerous techniques for fixation. The goals of fixation are anatomic reduction and stability, as this has been shown to result in improved chances for functional recovery [ In these circumstances, the dorsal distraction plate (also called dorsal “bridge” plating technique) can serve as an improved fixation technique by allowing comminuted articular fragments to reduce under ligamentotaxis and provide a buttress for the dorsal cortex of the distal radius. In addition, a long dorsal plate can bridge past metaphyseal comminution, which cannot be so easily addressed with standard volar plating [ The purpose of this study is to review the current literature pertaining to the treatment of distal radius fractures with dorsal bridge plating. Furthermore, this study will compare these outcomes with standard open reduction internal fixation using volar plate fixation. With the assistance of a clinical librarian, a literature search was performed in Medline (Pubmed) and EMBASE. No limitations on publication date and type were applied. Only clinical studies assessing patients with a distal radius fracture treated with dorsal distraction plating were included in the study. Basic science and/or cadaveric studies were excluded. Studies were excluded if they were case report studies or had less than five (5) patients. For all included articles, we assessed study characteristics including number of patients, patient demographic information, fracture type by AO classification, and time to plate removal. The primary outcome used for this systematic review was range of motion (ROM) and grip strength at final follow up. ROM measurements analyzed were wrist flexion, extension, supination and pronation expressed in degrees. Secondary outcome measures were radiographic parameters including volar tilt, radial height, radial inclination, and articular step off. Study quality was also assessed using the modified Coleman Score ( We identified 16 eligible citations through PubMed and the EMBASE databases (  Data regarding ROM was collected including wrist flexion, extension, supination and pronation, and is reported in  Complications with dorsal bridge plating were not universally documented by the included studies. The paper by Hanel et al. [ Burke and Singer [ Functional results from other types of fixation for distal radius fractures, including volar/dorsal plating, percutaneous pinning, and external fixation, has been thoroughly investigated. Conversely, evidence on outcomes after dorsal distraction plating is quite limited. Historically, dorsal distraction plating was used primarily as an alternative to external fixation. Recent literature has indicated that this type of fixation method can be used as an alternative to volar plating and therefore used as the primary surgical technique for AO type A3 and AO type C2/C3 distal radius fractures [ The present study reviews the current literature for dorsal distraction plating for distal radius fractures. Functional outcomes were analyzed including ROM in flexion, extension, supination and pronation. The current evidence suggests that patients treated with dorsal distraction plating for distal radius fractures regain 48° of flexion and 51° of extension. Furthermore, patients were able to achieve 76° of supination and 74° of pronation. Grip strength was found to be 80% compared to the contralateral, uninjured limb. When compared to current literature of prospective randomized trials analyzing outcomes after volar plating for distal radius fractures, patients treated with dorsal distraction plating appear to have comparable outcomes [ Other retrospective trials have also found comparable results in terms of ROM for patients treated with volar plate fixation. Dzaja et al. [ Radiographic outcomes of distal radius fractures treated with dorsal distraction plating are also comparable to those treated with volar plate fixation. Patients treated with dorsal distraction plating have a restoration in their normal distal radius radiographic parameters ( Complication rates of dorsal plating are exceedingly low. Hanel et al. [ The present study had several limitations. The major weakness of this study is the limited body of current literature for review. As stated previously, only sixteen studies that discuss dorsal distraction plating were identified, with only half of these being eligible for analysis. Of the eight included studies, there was a large degree of variability between the methodology of study design and outcome measures. Furthermore, follow-up time between studies varied greatly. Another limitation of this study was that the quality of individual studies included was low. All but two studies were retrospective studies with low sample sizes. Finally, while we tried to demonstrate a comparison of results of dorsal bridge plating to both external fixation and volar plating results, there is significant bias in doing this as the patient samples were unlikely to be the same. A randomized controlled trial would be needed to minimize such sources of bias when comparing these techniques. The currently available evidence on dorsal distraction plating demonstrates that this technique has very good results in the treatment of severely comminuted intra-articular distal radius fractures. Complication rates are lower than with external fixation, while clinical and radiographic outcomes are comparable to historical evidence of gold standard fixation techniques (volar plating) for these fracture types. Although initially used as an alternative to external fixation, there is evidence to show that this type of fixation can be useful for the primary treatment of AO type A3 and C2/C3 fracture patterns. While the necessity of plate removal is one negative feature of this technique, there are many pertinent positives. It has a lower complication rate than external fixation, and early weight bearing through the wrist is permitted. Furthermore, it is a much simpler operation than volar plating of complex articular distal radial fractures, making it a particularly valuable tool for the low-volume surgeon managing complex distal radius fractures. Our study demonstrated that despite the distraction plate immobilizing the wrist for upwards of 3 months, post-operative restoration of functional ROM and grip strength is excellent and comparable to that of volar plate fixation. There has not been a prospective study comparing dorsal distraction plating to standard open reduction internal fixation with volar plating or other techniques. Such a study is needed to enhance decision making regarding appropriate patient selection for this technique. None. The paper is part of a supplement based on the 2017 workshop on “External Fixation and Percutaneous Pinning.” Support for the publication of this supplement was provided by the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation (OTCF) sponsored by a research grant from Stryker.