A model has been developed to describe the breakage behavior of particle breakage in a smooth double roll crusher. In addition to this, an empirical relationship has been obtained between Hardgrove Grindability Index (HGI) of material and breakage parameters. The model uses matrix method of breakage process analysis. Experiments were carried out in a laboratory scale smooth double roll crusher using different materials. The model has been verified experimentally and gives product size distribution after breakage which matches with the experimental distribution well within the satisfactory range. The In previous papers, There are few characteristics of the breakage process which are assumed to be valid for the breakage in roll crusher. If the particle size range is split into geometric size, the breakage of each size interval occurs independently of other sizes. These size intervals are known as size grades. The size grade containing largest particles is numbered one. The ratio of geometric progression is Assume each particle, if selected for breakage is crushed only once. It means in Assume particles which are smaller in size than the gap width between the rolls pass uncrushed. This assumption is used to define the selection function. The probability of breakage is proportional to the A particle of size  Define Coefficient of size dependence, Define a square matrix Ω in which Define a transition grade size number For For Where, Equation of the process becomes: Alternatively, this equation can be written as, Eq. ( The feed and product size distribution is known in vector form from the experiments, the breakage matrix is known and a guess value of For various values of Eqs. Here Eq. ( Convert the Then the solution of Eq. ( In the second phase of the model Experiments were carried out in a smooth double roll crusher and the material used to obtain the empirical relationship were bituminous coal, galena, hematite and quartz. Further the model was verified by applying it on limestone for which HGI was known and Each of the five materials was crushed into a Blake type of jaw crusher and the product from the jaw crusher was sieved using 12.7 A 50 gram sample of material, which was retained by 500 µm size screen but passes through 1009 µm size screen, was then placed in a stationary grinding bowl in which eight steel balls can run in a circular path. A loaded ring was placed on top of the set of balls with a gravity load of 284 N. The machine was run for 60 revolutions. The top was removed and the material was recovered. The material was then sized and the quantity less than 200 µm were recorded as The test results in a value for HGI were generally between 30 and 100. A high value indicates that a crusher using this material will have a high output while a low value indicates the crusher will have a reduced capacity using this material. Galena was assumed to have an HGI value of 100 and lower value of HGI means harder material. The results of applying model to calculate selection function parameter For limestone, the HGI value is known and using Eq. ( The present work can be divided into two phases. In the first phase a model was obtained which can be applied to breakage process in a roll crusher. This model was based on the framework proposed by Product size distribution is varied with the type of material. The standard deviation remains around 10.0 and this value is well within the acceptable range. The model is verified by performing experiments on Limestone and calculating the product distribution experimentally as well as by simulation. As the value of omega has been varied with material and no relationship has been established for it, thus limiting the predictive capability of the model. Also there is scope of further modification in the model and generalization of the model for a greater number of particle properties and varying operating conditions as well as machine characteristics. Present model can also be extended to closed circuit operations by considering non-unity value of parameter  ratio of size grades   Largest particle diameter in Size distribution vector for feed Hardgrove Grindability Index Identity matrix Subscripts for size grade number, the highest size grade is assigned one. Transition grade size number: in a size distribution vector, size grade which contains the particles equal to gap width of roll crusher Size distribution vector for product Weight of less than 200 μm material in Hardgrove Grindability test Gap between rolls of a smooth double roll crusher Particle sizes in μm, sieve diameter in present context = Selection matrix/ Number of breakage in a breakage operation Power of size dependence, a parameter in Proportion selected for breakage in an assembly Coefficient of size dependence: in a The authors wish to acknowledge Chemical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India for financial support.