Separation strategies for Jordanian phosphate ore with siliceous and calcareous gangues were investigated by combined beneficiation and characterization techniques. To avoid ore resource waste and save the separation cost, it is noteworthy that different size fractions of Jordanian phosphate ore produced by sieving should be processed by different methods. The 74–300μm size fraction which has fewer gangues than coarser and finer size fractions is treated by scrubbing to increase P2O5 grade up to 30%. The coarser size fraction (>300μm) requires secondary grinding. The finer size fraction (<74μm) with 23.85% P2O5 grade is processed by flotation to remove quartz gangue. The acid conditions can improve the flotation performance remarkably. The dissolution of carbonates at low pH value facilitates the quartz flotation. At pH 4.8, the P2O5 grade, P2O5 recovery and quartz removal ratio are 30.82%, 82.00% and 62.20%, respectively. Calcination can be employed to separate calcite gangue; however, it should be applied after quartz flotation to avoid the formation of CaSiO3 phase. To improve the flotation performance, the amount of <45μm particles should be reduced, and an alternative method is avoiding over-grinding.Phosphate rock is a vital nonrenewable resource. Because of the increasing consumption of phosphate fertilizers and chemicals, the demand of phosphate ores increases sharply. Generally, the run-of-mine phosphate ores are low grade, and they should be processed or upgraded to match the market grade (around 30% P Physical, chemical as well as thermal treatment techniques are used for concentrating low grade phosphate ores. Mechanical crushing and screening utilize the differences in differential mineral friability to decrease the ore size and consequently to liberate the valuable minerals from gangue and cementing matrix. An example of using this technique is the beneficiation plant of the Nile Valley phosphate rock at East Siba'eya area, Egypt ( In this paper, a Jordanian phosphate rock with fluorapatite–quartz–calcite system is researched. This ore is one of the typical siliceous–calcareous phosphate ores. Combined with the results of different characterization techniques (chemical analysis, X-ray powder diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spectra), the effects of different beneficiation methods (sieving, scrubbing, calcination and flotation) are investigated. The aim of this paper is to choose the feasible separation strategies for this kind of siliceous–calcareous phosphate ore and improve its quality to satisfy the industry requirement. A phosphate ore from Abyad area in Jordan was crushed to minus 5 Dry-sieving was used and performed on a vertical vibratory sieve shaker with a pan and a series of selected standard sieves which were stacked with decreasing size. An oscillation amplitude of 2 200 Calcination was carried out in a muffle furnace. The temperature was raised to 950 Batch flotation tests were carried out at room temperature. 100 X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) pattern was recorded on the DX-2000 diffractometer using Cu Ka (l Size reduction by mechanical crushing and grinding is necessary in mineral processing. When the ore size decreases, the phosphates, carbonates, and silica can partially enrich in different size ranges ( The chemical analysis results of different size fractions treated by scrubbing, calcination and flotation, respectively are shown in For the coarser fraction, i.e. 300–600 For the fine fraction <  One of important factors in the flotation is the feed particle size range. In this study, the < X-ray diffraction analysis is shown in The elemental surface concentrations of original < According to the results of beneficiation experiments and characterizations, the separation strategies for Jordanian phosphate ore with quartz and calcite gangues are summarized as below: The crushed and ground ore is divided into different size ranges by sieving method. The coarse particles (> The fine particles (< The acidic conditions are more favorable for flotation than alkaline conditions. At pH 4.8, the P The authors are grateful to the