Simultaneous extraction of zinc and cadmium by a mixture of di-2-ethyl hexyl phosphoric acid (DEHPA) and mono-2-ethyl hexyl phosphoric acid (MEHPA), and the synergistic effect of MEHPA on co-extraction of zinc and cadmium with DEHPA have been investigated. It was shown that the extraction of zinc and cadmium by DEHPA and/or MEHPA can be increased by an increase of pH. The results also illustrate that the pH0.5 of zinc, by increase in MEHPA from 0.1 to 8 vol%, did not vary significantly while that of cadmium varies from 0.63 to 2.4. In other words MEHPA prevents selective extraction of zinc from aqueous media containing both zinc and cadmium. Studies on the selective separation parameter β
                     Zn/Cd show that it was reduced 50 to 13 times by an increase in MEHPA from 0.1 to 8.0 vol%. In this paper, the effects of DEHPA and MEHPA concentration on co-extraction of zinc and cadmium have been investigated.Due to the low concentration of dissolved zinc produced in the leaching of low grade ores, and the presence of impurities such as Cd, Ni, Co in the electrolyte, and also the need for ultra high purity (UHP) zinc from electrowinning, purification is essential. Solvent extraction is one of the most economical and practical purification processes. This method is used for extraction and purification of zinc from leach liquors. Almost all zinc solvent extraction units utilize DEHPA as the organic solvent, and studies of zinc solvent extraction have been performed by various researchers ( Investigations on solvent extraction of zinc by pure DEHPA have further been carried out ( After several extractions and stripping the experimental data were not similar and repeatable unless the DEHPA was substituted under the same conditions. It was therefore considered that the presence of impurities formed through decomposed extractant causes defects and problems in the extraction process. Thus in the solvent extraction of zinc, the effect of organic impurities is important. All the chemical reagents used, except kerosene, were of analytical grade. DEHPA was prepared by Merck chemical company, Germany. MEHPA reagent was used as a mix of DEHPA and MEHPA provided by Fluka, Switzerland. The concentration of organic extractant, with sum of DEHPA and MEHPA amounting to 20 vol%, was prepared by diluting the calculated amount of DEHPA and Mix DEHPA––MEHPA in kerosene. Kerosene was provided by the Tehran refinery company, Iran. The organic phases contained DEHPA and MEHPA with ([MEHPA]:[DEHPA]) ratios of 0, 0.05, 0.11, 0.25, 0.43 and 0.67 as extractant, respectively. Aliquot samples containing 50 g/L zinc or cadmium in ionic form were prepared by dissolving analytical grade zinc or cadmium sulfate, made by Fluka AB., Switzerland, in distilled water. In order to avoid the reduction of metal ions, 5 M sulfuric acid solution was prepared by diluting analytical grade sulfuric acid, from Baran Chemical Company of Iran, in double distilled water. Acidic solutions of zinc or cadmium were prepared by diluting the 50 g/L aliquot solution with 5 M sulfuric acid to produce the desired final concentrations. Ammonium hydrate (ammonium solution) from Baran Chemical Company of Iran was used to adjust the pH of the system. Batch experiments were carried out in a flask containing equal volumes (20 ml) of aqueous and organic phases. The mixture was agitated at constant temperature, by a mechanical shaker. The experiments were allowed to run for 1 h in order to reach equilibrium. The samples were retained for 3 h and the two phases were separated by passing through a separation funnel. Experiments were carried out at three different temperatures (25, 40 and 60 °C), the temperature of the system being controlled by a thermostatic reaction bath. The initial concentrations of zinc or cadmium in the aqueous phase in all experiments was 5 g/L. The zinc or cadmium content of the aqueous phase was analyzed by titrating with EDTA in the presence of Eirochromblack T as indicator. Zinc or cadmium concentration of the organic phase was determined by mass balance calculations. Experiments were carried out to study the effect of pH on the extraction of zinc and cadmium with different organic solvents. This parameter was investigated at constant ([MEHPA]:[DEHPA]) ratio and isotherm conditions. Extraction curves for different values of MEHPA (0.1 and 6 vol%) are illustrated in The extraction curves show a synergistic shift to the right by decreasing the relative amount of MEHPA with respect to the constant extractant concentration (20 vol%) of organic phase. The variation of log The effect of MEHPA on extraction at different acid media conditions was investigated. Variation of log As mentioned before an increase in ΔpH The separation factor ( The variation of This study was based on the decomposition problem of DEHPA in industrial production of zinc. The results obtained for zinc and cadmium were evaluated in terms of The authors wish to express their gratitude to ministry of Industry and Mine of the Islamic Republic of Iran for their financial support of this project. The authors wish to thank Dr. N. Parvin from Amirkabir University of Technology for his useful consultancy on the writing and editing of the manuscript.