The chemical process scale-up, from lab studies to industrial production, is challenging and requires deep knowledge of the kinetic model and the reactions that take place in the system. This knowledge is also useful in order to be employed for the reactor design and the determination of the optimal operational conditions. In this study, a model substituted phenol such as p-nitrophenol was degraded by electro-Fenton process and the reaction products yielded along the treatment were recorded. The kinetic model was developed using Matlab software and was based on main reactions that occurred until total mineralization which allowed predicting the degradation pathway under this advanced oxidation process. The predicted concentration profiles of p-nitrophenol, their intermediates and by-products in electro-Fenton process were validated with experimental assays and the results were consistent. Finally, based on the developed kinetic model the degradation process was optimized using central composite design taking as key parameters the ferrous ion concentration and current density.The development of industrial technologies and agricultural activities has promoted the continuous release of organic compounds which has been classified as potential threat to the aquatic ecosystems and human health. Among them, emerging pollutants such as pesticides, plasticizers or pharmaceutical and personal care products have been detected at low concentrations in wastewater treatment plant ( Several steps are involved into this technology: i) The design and scale-up of electrochemical AOPs represent an astonishing engineering challenge. Process simulation has been widely used as a crucial tool for plant design and optimization; nevertheless, AOPs are inherently complex and mathematical models are required to predict the evolution of the parent compound and oxidation by-products. For this purpose, several kinetic models have been proposed for accurately describing organic compounds oxidation in aqueous phase by AOPs such as UV/H Up to now, most researches have focused their attention on simpler organic compounds as target pollutant to develop a mechanistic model whereas studies related to the use of more complex molecules with high oxidation reaction intermediates have not been published in literature. Furthermore, kinetic models should be validated with experimental results obtained from laboratory at several conditions to assess the model's accuracy; however, previous studies had evaluated the model robustness under only one specified condition. Within this framework, the aim of this work was to develop a mechanistic model for the degradation and mineralization of more complex molecules by electro-Fenton process. For this purpose,  Electro-Fenton experiments were carried out with two-electrode system in a 250 mL undivided and isothermal cylindrical glass reactor (60 mm i.d. and 90 mm). The commercial 3D carbon-felt cathode (Mersen, RVG-2000), with 99.9% carbon content, 0.088 g/cm The degradation of The intermediate products formed throughout electro-Fenton process were identified and quantified by gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC-MS). After treatment, the aqueous samples were extracted three times with ethyl-acetate, dried over anhydrous sodium sulphate and concentrated to dryness by vacuum evaporation. N,O-Bis(trimethylsilyl) trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) was used to prepare the trimethylsilyl derivatives of the aromatic intermediates. The derivatized samples were analyzed in a GC-MS system (Agilent 6850) equipped with a HP5-MS capillary column (0.25 mm i.d. X 30 m with 0.25 μm film) using hydrogen carrier gas. The injector temperature was 280 °C whereas the temperature of the column oven was initially set at 50 °C for 5 min, further increasing at 5 °C·min Generated short-chain carboxylic acids were determined by ion-exclusion HPLC (Agilent 1100) equipped with Rezex™ ROA-Organic Acid H+ (8%) column (300 mm × 7.8 mm; Phenomenex) at 55 °C. A 0.025 M H The concentration of nitrate ions released throughout electro-Fenton was measured by ion chromatography (Dionex ICS-3000 equipped with a conductivity detector) using an anionic exchanger column, Metrosep A Supp 5250/4.0 mm (Metrohm) (C.A.C.T.I. University of Vigo). The volume of injection was 20 μL. A solution of 3.2 mM sodium carbonate and 1.0 mM sodium hydrogen carbonate solution at 0.7 mL min The kinetic model was implemented by Matlab 6.5 software package (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA). The ordinary differential equations (ODE) were solved using a stiff-solver ( Several statistical methods have been widely used for optimization of chemical and physical processes ( The simulated results were analyzed applying the coefficient of determination (R The identification of aromatic intermediates and short-chain carboxylic acids formed throughout electro-Fenton process was carried out by GC-MS and ion-exclusion HPLC as described above in experimental section. For this purpose, several batch experiments were performed at low current density (4.39 A m Based on the identified degradation by-products, a plausible mineralization pathway for the The subsequent hydroxylation of oxidation by-products generates polyhydroxylated cyclic compounds as 1,2,4-benzenetriol, pyrogallol and 2,3-dihidroxy-1,4-benzoquinone ( Several polyhydroxylated derivatives including hydroquinone, pyrocatechol, resorcinol and pyrogallol and succinic acid as short-chain carboxylic acid were selected as model organic compounds to estimate their hydroxylation constants. Thus, the estimation was carried out by competitive kinetic methods using According to kinetic constants for hydroquinone, pyrocatechol and resorcinol ( The proposed mathematical model for Assuming Electro-Fenton experiments were carried out in a well-mixed isothermal batch reactor to avoid potential concentration and/or temperature gradients in the aqueous solution. Saturated concentration of dissolved oxygen throughout the process was kept, and pH 2.8 was selected to optimize electrochemical generation of H The continuous electrochemical regeneration of ferrous ion on the cathode ensured high iron availability in the solution and improved the effectiveness of Adsorption process on the carbon-felt cathode, direct electrochemical degradation on BDD anode surface as a result of the presence of adsorbed hydroxyl radical and several bimolecular reactions as scavenging, polymerization, condensation and dismutation were assumed negligible compared to electro-Fenton process. The mass balance equations for the parent compound and oxidation by-products for isothermal constant-volume batch reactor were determined according to Eq. Assuming The kinetic constant for hydroxyl radical formation according to the classical Fenton's reaction is widely reported as 63 M The high reactivity of hydroxyl radical towards aromatic compounds formed throughout electro-Fenton process ( The kinetic model may be affected by some operational parameters such as ferrous ion concentration and current density. For this reason, response surface methodology based on CDD was applied and the relative contribution of these key parameters on The system performance was evaluated after 15 min of treatment and the responses were accurately described by quadratic polynomial equations defined by Eqs. According to the p-values, the variables contribute significantly to the response prediction at p-values below 0.05 whereas non-significant variables involve p-values above 0.10. ANOVA analysis ( The model robustness was validated experimentally performing electro-Fenton assays under optimal conditions. The obtained results showed a deviation lower than 2.5% compared to theoretical values and demonstrating the adequate predictive performance of the mathematical model. Moreover, hydroxylated reaction intermediates such as hydroquinone, pyrocatechol, resorcinol and pyrogallol and succinic acid as model short-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids from The development of novel kinetic model for This research has been financially supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at