Strain hardening of a material is an important phenomenon, which is required to study the plastic deformation of any material and also is an important parameter in the study of workability criteria of metals. The present investigation has been undertaken to evaluate the instantaneous strain hardening behaviour experienced during the cold working of sintered aluminium iron composites with various iron contents from 0 to 10% under various stress state conditions namely uniaxial, plane and triaxial. Sintered preforms with two different aspect ratios namely 0.44 and 0.75 with for different per cent of iron contents ranging from 0 to 10% were prepared and cold forged. The instantaneous strain hardening exponent (n
                     i) and the instantaneous strength coefficient (K
                     i) were obtained for each aspect ratios and iron contents and found that they have showed tremendous variations in the instantaneous values of strain hardening exponent and strength coefficient for the addition of different iron content, for different aspect ratios and for different stress state conditions.bulged diameter contact diameter initial diameter height of the compact at fracture initial height of compact strength coefficient strain hardening exponent Poisson's ratio effective strain component radial strain component axial strain component hoop strain component effective stress component mean stress radial stress component axial stress component hoop stress component Powder metallurgy (P/M) process provides several advantages when comparing with conventional manufacturing process. At present, the powder metallurgy components are being widely used for sophisticated industrial applications. The worldwide popularity of powder metallurgy lies in the ability of this technique to produce such complex shapes with exact dimensions at a high rate of production with low cost prices. Frequently, this technology is used for material systems that are hard to machine such as tungsten or molybdenum or very much difficult to cast due to detrimental solidification behaviour of material chosen. Green Workability can be defined as the degree of deformation that can be achieved in a particular metalworking process without the occurrence of a defect. Gouveia et al. One of the chief characteristics of the plastic deformation of metals is the fact the shear stress required to produce slip continuously increases with increasing shear strain In this paper, a complete investigation on the instantaneous strain hardening behaviour of an aluminium powder metallurgy composites with various per cent of iron contents ranging from 0 to 10% for the various stress state conditions namely, uniaxial, plane and triaxial conditions with two different aspect ratios were performed. The instantaneous strain hardening exponent ( The mathematical expressions used and proposed for the determination of various upsetting parameters for various stress state conditions are discussed below. In the compression of P/M part, under frictional conditions, the average density is increased. Friction enhances densification and at the same time decreases the height reduction at fracture. The state of stress in a homogeneous compression process is as follows. According to Abdel-Rahman and Sheikh When the compression continues, the final diameter increases and the corresponding hoop strain, which is tensile in nature, also increases until it reaches the fracture limit. From reports published elsewhere According to Narayanasamy and Pandey Since, the radial stress According to Narayanasamy and Ponalagusamy From the Eq. Since Atomized aluminium and iron powders of the characteristic stated in the The sintered preforms were cleaned from the sand particles and the dimensional measurement made before and after each deformation. The deformation of the compact was carried out between two flat open dies hardened to Rc 50–55 and tempered to Rc 46–50 on a 100     Because of iron addition, the stress level increases due to reinforcement of iron particles. The strain hardening exponent value decreases with increasing aspect ratio because of more pores presence. The strength coefficient value increases with increasing aspect ratio because of more pores presence.