Polycrystalline GaN films were deposited on quartz and ZnO buffer layers over quartz by reactive sputtering of a GaAs target in 100% nitrogen at 550 °C and 700 °C. Micro-structural investigations of the films were carried out using high resolution X-ray diffraction, atomic force microscopy and Raman spectroscopy. GaN films deposited on ZnO buffer layers exhibit strongly preferred (0002) orientation of crystallites. In particular, the film deposited at 700 °C on ZnO buffer layer over amorphous quartz substrate showed large crystallite size, both along and perpendicular to growth direction, strong and nearly complete c-axis orientation of crystallites with tilt of ~2.5° and low value of micro-strain ~2×10−3. The significant improvement in crystallinity and orientation of crystallites in the GaN film is attributed to the presence of the ZnO buffer layer on quartz substrate and its small lattice mismatch (1.8%) with GaN.The development of GaN based high brightness light emitting diodes and laser diodes has been followed by the realization of high frequency power transistors, solar blind photodiodes, ultra-violet light emitting diodes and detectors, high electron mobility transistors and several other electronic devices In an interesting approach, polycrystalline GaN films with improved structural quality have been deposited over ZnO buffer layers on silicon substrates, using MBE In a recent work GaN films were deposited by 13.56 MHz, radio frequency (rf) magnetron reactive sputtering of a 3 inch GaAs target with 100% nitrogen as sputtering-cum-reactive gas, as described in detail, elsewhere The structure of the films was studied using PANalytical X'Pert PRO powder diffractometer using Cu K The XRD patterns of GaN films deposited at substrate temperatures of 550 °C and 700 °C on quartz and ZnO buffer layer over quartz are presented in In order to assess the crystalline quality of highly A strongly oriented polycrystalline film on amorphous substrates can be considered to consist of crystallites, with certain mean vertical and lateral dimensions. For materials having hexagonal structure, usually the crystallites are oriented with their <0002> axis along the growth direction and are rotated randomly about this direction. Information about lateral and vertical coherence lengths (crystallite sizes), crystallite tilt and micro-strain (non-uniform strain) can be obtained from full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the omega (   Phi ( The surface morphology of GaN films deposited at 700 °C on quartz and ZnO buffer layer was investigated by atomic force microscopy and the results are shown in  The above results can be summarized and explained as follows. The significant increase in crystallite size (both lateral and along growth direction) and the small values of tilt (~ GaN films were deposited on quartz and ZnO buffer layer on quartz by reactive sputtering of GaAs target in 100% nitrogen at 550 °C and 700 °C. HRXRD, AFM and Raman spectroscopy studies together show that the GaN film deposited at 700 °C on ZnO buffer layer possesses a much improved crystallinity. In particular, it showed the presence of large crystallites (~ The financial support for this work received from the Board of Research in Nuclear Sciences, Department of Atomic Energy (GoI) is gratefully acknowledged. Tapas Ganguli and Ravi Kumar are thankful to Dr. S. M. Oak for his support and encouragement. FIST (PHYSICS)-IRCC SPM Facility and CRNTS of IIT Bombay are respectively, acknowledged for providing the facilities for AFM and Raman studies.