This paper presents an application of real-time optimization (RTO) to a simulated ore grinding plant. The control and optimization methods are based on a dynamic linear model of the process. A linear programming (LP) method is used on-line to find the optimum controller set-point as a function of the process-operating constraints. The optimizer selects set-point values that maximize circuit throughput subject to constraints on circulating load, pump box level and hydrocyclone overflow and underflow densities. At the regulatory control level, performances of unconstrained and constrained multivariable predictive controllers are compared and discussed.Ore comminution processes are huge consumers of energy, which determine the performance of the subsequent ore beneficiation processes. Their optimization is then an important issue in the mineral processing industry At a first level, optimization can be performed at the design stage of the process for the selection of the flow-sheet configuration and the equipment size The present study considers mainly the third optimization level, i.e. the selection of the optimal set-points of the controller. However, to illustrate the method on a simulated grinding circuit, the fourth level, optimal control, will be also simulated, although this is not the primary objective of the study. The set-points selected by the LP–RTO are then distributed to the control loops at the lower level. The latter may use conventional controllers or model-based controllers. In the case of LP optimization, the process is to be operated on constraints. The controllers have to manage these constraints, which should also be enforced during transient regimes. An optimal method is proposed in this study to solve this problem. It is based on a constrained predictive control algorithm. The paper is organized into three parts. In the first one, a closed-loop grinding circuit is described. In the second part, an LP–RTO method is presented in a sufficiently general form to allow its application to any other process. The paper goes through the model expression, the constant factor updating, the formulation of the objective function and the constraints, the calculation of the set-points, a discussion on the feasibility and, finally, the presentation of the optimal constrained controller for the lower level of the hierarchical optimization strategy. In the third part, the application of the above steps to the closed-loop grinding circuit is detailed. Simulated results are then discussed, showing the efficiency of this hierarchical method based on an LP steady-state optimal supervision of the set-points of an optimal multivariable controller. A typical rod-mill ball-mill grinding circuit is depicted in Normally, a grinding operation must be tuned in such a way that the subsequent separation process is optimal and thus gives a metal recovery and concentrate grade which maximize the NSR (the revenue obtained by selling the concentrates to a smelter) maximize production at constant fineness maximize fineness at constant production optimize a weighted function of both above objectives Two manipulated variables are available for the ore feedrate maximization subject to constraints: the water addition to the pump and the rod-mill feedrate. The optimum is limited by process constraints, which may depend on design parameters or operating conditions of the circuit A real process is necessarily restricted by constraints. Depending upon the structure of the optimization criterion and the location of the constraints, the optimum can be located on constraints or can be unconstrained. An optimization criterion linear with respect to the manipulated variables leads necessarily to an optimum on constraints. Finding an optimum subject to constraints is a task very different from finding an unconstrained optimum. When the optimal process operation is located on constraints, it is important to identify the active constraints and the values of the constrained variables, in order to maintain the process on these constraints. Only constrained optimization is addressed in this paper. The method is valid for linear or linearized objective function involving linear constraints. Both the optimizer and the optimal controller are based on a process model. Various compromises must be considered when selecting the model. On one hand, a simple model offers poor prediction capability; however, fast model updating can be used to minimize model-process discrepancy, since the model contains a low number of parameters to be updated. On the other hand, a complex model has a better overall prediction ability but, since it is complex, parameter updating is more difficult to achieve. The method proposed here relies on a simple model approach with fast parameter update. The optimizer calculations are based on the steady-state values of the dynamic linear model of the process used in the optimal controller. Linear dynamic transfer functions can be built easily by using identification strategies based on process excitation. Inputs are grouped into two classes: manipulated inputs The model constant is selected in order to eliminate the difference between the process and the model outputs at the actual operating point. For this purpose, the time-varying model constant, which is the difference between the process and the dynamic model, is continuously measured. This value is then filtered and used as the steady-state constant The objective function is a scalar value In order to use linear programming techniques, this objective function must be a linear function of This linear function in Assuming that the gradient of the linearized Constraints can be any linear function of the variables Assuming that Since this problem contains a linear objective function with linear constraints, the optimal solution As the model constant The optimal set-point values The LP strategy pushes the process in the direction where the objective function improves until no further improvement is possible without violating one of the constraints. A fundamental property of LP optimization is that, except for some degenerated cases, the optimum is located at constraint intersections. The bias update influences the location of these constraints. As a consequence, the optimum may not be always on the same constraints. Real-time optimization is needed in order to keep the process at its optimum since these constraints continuously move due to measured and unmeasured disturbances. Degenerated cases happen when either no solution, or multiple solutions, or unbounded solutions to the LP problem are found. When no feasible solution exists, constraints are too tight and must be relaxed. Any solution of the multiple solutions case can be used with equal success. The presence of an unbounded solution means that not enough constraints have been defined. This case is impossible if lower and upper bounds constraints are imposed to all manipulated variables. There are limitations to the LP optimizer performance since set-points only are respecting constraints. It is possible that, when applying these set-points, the controllers use a transient path which violates the constraints. This may occur since only some outputs variables are usually controlled. To prevent constraint violation during transients, a control strategy that takes into account constraints on auxiliary variables must be used The primary objective of the control strategy is to bring the process to its optimal condition The main advantage of predictive controllers is their ability to handle hard constraints. While linear programming optimization selects set-points that respect constraints for steady-state operation, constraints at the control level can be used to ensure that the transient response also respect these constraints. Hard constraints on the input variables can be applied very easily. Hard equality constraints should not be applied to output variables. Solving a control criterion that requires an exact output value to be specified is equivalent to a deadbeat controller. To prevent robustness problems associated to deadbeat controllers, only inequality output constraints are applied. The control criterion of For the purpose of demonstrating the LP–RTO method, the process of The proposed LP–RTO strategy is applied to this simulated grinding process. There are two manipulated variables available in the grinding circuit:       In the present example, the ground product fineness ( For this two-input–four-output grinding circuit, the transfer matrix is defined as: The numerical values of the transfer functions are obtained from the responses of the simulator around a nominal operating regime. The results are shown in The LP optimizer is designed to keep the process at its operating constraints while maximizing the tonnage The optimal set-points The optimizer selects the set-point value A proper control strategy must be designed to track the set-points selected by the LP optimizer. The controller is designed to manipulate The simulation sequences  Real-time optimization is used to find the operating conditions that give the best performances achievable as disturbances occur in a process. Various optimization structures exist in order to achieve this goal. LP optimization is a simple method that can be used when the optimum is located on process constraints and when the objective function, as well as the process model, is linear or linearized. For small non-linearities, bias update is a simple method that gives a continuous correction to the process model. The LP optimizer can efficiently handle steady-state inputs, states and outputs, equality and inequality constraints. However, for transient constraints handling, a control system that enforces constraints must be used. An application to a simulated ore grinding circuit shows that this optimization scheme is efficient for throughput maximization while maintaining the product fineness at a constant set-point, without violating overflow density, circulating load and sump level constraints, except during transient regimes. Because the simulator has been validated on various plant data and is able to mimic realistic disturbances such as ore grindability variations, it is believed that the strategy is applicable to real plants. However, as in any other strategy, the transfer matrix should be properly identified and some safety features to back off to manual set-point control for very abnormal operating conditions should be implemented. This study is part of a generic project on the application of automatic control to the mineral processing and extractive metallurgy industries. It is supported by the Natural Resources Departments of the Quebec and Canada Governments as well as by a consortium of 14 Canadian mining companies.