This study deals with the maximization of composite yield subjected to multiple product constraints simultaneously based on float–sink data of a lignite coal from Yozgat-Ayrıdam district of Turkey by using equal incremental product quality approach. Solver and Mathcad were used for determination of optimum separation densities for the coarser size fraction (130×18mm) and the finer size fraction (18×0.5mm) by Dense Medium Bath (DMB) and Dense Medium Cyclone (DMC), respectively. Four different cases were analyzed for the incremental product quality approach. In the first case, composite yield was maximized to 87.45% for the target composite ash of 18.26% with sulfur content of 0.98% when the incremental ashes were equalized by Solver. In the second case, yield maximized to 76.55% for the target sulfur of 0.83% with an ash content of 14.65% by Solver equalization of the incremental sulfur. In the third case, multiple product quality (ash and sulfur) was employed simultaneously by Solver. Yield was maximized only to 66.87% with ash and sulfur content of 11.12% and 0.74%, respectively. In the fourth case, multiple constraints were subjected to the maximization of the yield simultaneously using Mathcad. Yield was maximized to 66.33% with ash and sulfur content of 11.00% and 0.74%, respectively. The yield maximization was successfully achieved using Solver and Mathcad based on multiple product quality (ash and sulfur) constraints simultaneously as well as single product quality constraint.In coal preparation equal incremental product quality concept is widely being used to maximize clean coal yield for a desired constraint with multiple cleaning circuits In our recent study Coal preparation plants typically operate with parallel DM circuits running at parameters determined by laboratory float–sink test to clean individual size fractions of rom coal after crushing and screening into size fractions. Constant incremental product approach is used for the parallel circuits in coal washing plants in order to maximize the composite clean coal yield. Clean coal product from a washing plant probably may also have to fulfill product ash and/or product sulfur. Probable error (Ep) values are computed using Osborne’s The empirical fitting constant ( The predicted cumulative yield and cumulative ash of the coarse and fine coals are determined at each SG These data are employed in order to calculate the incremental product ash and sulfur corresponding to each separation density. Cubic relationships are assumed between Yield ( The performance of DM separators is never ideal due to misplacement of a greater portion of the lower density middling to the clean coal. The misplacement of higher quality (lower ash) material diminishes the effective incremental quality. Thus, a correction must be made to account for the impact of misplaced solids on incremental quality. It is also well-known that the efficiencies of DM separators tend to decrease as the particle size decreases In this study the washability data of a lignite coal from Yozgat-Ayrıdam For the calculation of Ep, Four different cases were analyzed employing the incremental product quality approach. In the first case, equal incremental ash quality at the specified ash value and optimum cut points of separation were determined by using Solver considering only ash quality at a time. In the second case, equal incremental sulfur quality at the specified sulfur value and optimum cut points of separation were determined by using Solver considering only sulfur quality at a time. In the third case, equal incremental ash and sulfur qualities at the specified ash, specified sulfur values and optimum cut points of separation were determined by utilizing Solver simultaneously. In the fourth case, equal incremental ash and sulfur qualities at the specified ash, specified sulfur values and optimum cut points of separation were determined by utilizing Mathcad 14.0 (Parametric Technology Corporation) simultaneously.   Since this set of yield values is different from those in Case 1, a more appropriate conclusion is that the same maximum yield of 76.55% can be achievable while satisfying either an incremental ash content of 37.22% or an incremental sulfur content of 1.51%. Incremental ash approach produced composite coal having less ash but, nearly the same sulfur content than incremental sulfur approach at higher operating densities for DMB and DMC, respectively. The product ash vs. maximum plant yield relationship will be a better curve when it is generated by equalizing the incremental ash content than by equalizing the incremental sulfur content of each washing circuit as demonstrated by the  Similarly, the lowest composite yield was obtained as 63.69% for the target sulfur of 0.72% by operating DMB and DMC at the densities of 1.41 and 1.46, respectively (   Operating cut points of separation determined by incremental ash content for each circuit in order to maximize composite yield of clean coal were not harmonious with those obtained by incremental sulfur content in this study. This is in good agreement with the previously reported study   Evaluating all cases, maximum yield was attained in Case 1 which was based on incremental ash approach. The lowest yield and operating density values were obtained by using double constraint simultaneously (Case 3 and Case 4). Besides, the ash and sulfur content of the composite clean coal were also lowered for Case 3 and Case 4. But, all the values related ash and sulfur contents obtained by all cases are in good agreement with the Turkish fuel standards Following conclusions can be drawn from this study: The float–sink data of Yozgat-Ayrıdam lignite coal was successfully used for the yield maximization study using Solver and Mathcad based on multiple product quality (ash and sulfur) constraints simultaneously as well as single product quality constraint. The calculated yield, ash and sulfur values with the experimental yield, ash and sulfur values obtained from float–sink data were compared and the results were in a good agreement with each other. In the first case, maximum clean coal yield was maximized to 87.45% in order to get composite ash of 18.26% by using incremental ash approach. The sulfur content of this composite coal was calculated as 0.98%. It was possible when the coarser and the finer fractions were treated at operating densities of 1.82 and 1.90 by DMB and DMC, respectively. In the second case, maximum clean coal yield was maximized to 76.55% for the target sulfur of 0.83% by using incremental sulfur approach. The ash content of the clean coal was calculated as 14.65%. The optimum operating densities for DMB and DMC were determined as 1.49 and 1.90, respectively. In the third case, maximum clean coal yield was found as 66.87% with an ash content of 11.12% and sulfur content of 0.74% by using Solver according to both incremental ash and sulfur approaches simultaneously. For this aim, the operating densities for DMB and DMC should be set at 1.43 and 1.51, respectively. In the fourth case, the result obtained from the third case was almost confirmed by using Mathcad. Yield was maximized to 66.33% with ash and sulfur content of 11.00% and 0.74%, respectively. The operating densities were determined as 1.43 and 1.51 for DMB and DMC, respectively. Considering all cases, ash and sulfur values obtained by both incremental product quality approaches were in good agreement with the Turkish fuel standards as well as global fuel standards.