Garnet-bearing rhyolitic flows and ignimbrites occur together with an andesitic lava flow in the central part of the Mesa Central in the western part of the Mexican state of San Luis Potosí, forming a typical K-rich sub-alkaline intra-plate tectonic setting bimodal series. Electron microprobe analysis indicates that the garnet is homogeneous and primarily almandine with subordinately pyrope, grossular, spessartine, and andradite. The chemistry of the garnets as well as the chemistry of the host rhyolite implies the crystallization of garnet as a primary phase from a lower crustal peraluminous magma. Rhyolite-MELTS simulations on the crystallization confirms this information. Trace element analyses on the rhyolitic ignimbrite and the garnet-bearing rhyolite suggest that the petrogenesis of these acidic rocks involved partial melting of the lower crust and fractional crystallization. The andesitic lava flow is metaluminous and its trace element patterns suggest that the parental magma was derived from upper mantle partial melting and that it was stored at the mantle-crust boundary. We propose that the southern Basin and Range extension event favored the direct ascent of these magmas from the source through the brittle and thin crust (30–33 km), where slight interaction with the country rock took place, to the surface. UPb dating on zircons from the rhyolites yielded ages ranging from 32.26 ± 0.92 Ma to 31.52 ± 0.48 Ma, consistent with the 31.25 ± 0.70 Ma whole rock KAr age of the garnet-bearing rhyolite. This information supports the interpretation that the garnets are not xenocrysts but they are crystallized from a rhyolitic magma at lower crustal depths and ascended fast through the brittle crust, so the garnets could be preserved.Almandine garnet-bearing rhyolitic rocks are uncommon in the geologic record (e.g. Bimodal volcanism is widespread in earth history and have been reported in intra-continental extension settings ( Bimodal volcanism has been documented in the southern and central part of the Mesa Central, especially in the San Luis Potosí Volcanic Field, where ignimbrites of rhyolitic composition (e.g., the Panalillo Ignimbrite, 26.8 ± 1.3 Ma) are associated with basalts (e.g. the La Placa Basalt, 27.2 ± 0.6 Ma). Both rock types have very similar Oligocene ages and display geochemical characteristics typical of bimodal volcanism ( Previous studies on bimodal volcanism in the southern and central Mesa Central show that partial melting and fractional crystallization are the two main magmatic processes involved ( The study area is located near La Herradura, in the Mexican state of San Luis Potosí, 150 km northeast of the city of San Luis Potosí ( The general rareness of almandine garnet-bearing rocks and further experimental results indicating a high-pressure origin propose that their formation and eruption is favored by special geodynamic conditions (e.g. The aim of this work is to investigate the origins of garnet-bearing lavas based on the study of their geological, petrographic, geochemical and age features. The interpretation of these dataset provide new information on the origin of garnet-bearing rhyolites using the case study of La Herradura and their associated bimodal suite. La Herradura is located at the boundary between the Guerrero and the western part of the Sierra Madre terranes, the Central Mexico Mesozoic Basin ( The basement at the east of the study area is built by the Central Mexico Mesozoic Basin (CMMB), that is constituted by a marine Mesozoic sedimentary sequence more than 5 km thick, ranging in age from late Triassic to late Cretaceous ( All these Mesozoic sequences were strongly deformed during the Laramide orogeny, close to the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary ( In the study area, the oldest rocks exposed consist of a lower Cretaceous marine sequence including limestones, clay-rich limestones, and shales, unconformably overlain by the rhyolitic El Sombrero Ignimbrite ( During the Pliocene-Pleistocene, 60 to 250 m-thick sandstones interlayered with conglomerates were deposited in erosional discordance over both the lower Cretaceous and Oligocene volcanic rocks, and locally covered by Holocene gravels and silts, caliches, lacustrine materials and alluvium. Locally, the El Sombrero Ignimbrite consists of a light pink to gray, porphyritic, rhyolitic, and un-welded ignimbrite, which contains quartz, plagioclase, K-feldspar, and pyroxene. The preserved estimated volume of the ignimbrite is 5 km The contact between the El Sombrero and the garnet-bearing rhyolitic lava is erosive and its base is formed by an up to 4 m thick glassy base ( The contact between the Zaragoza Andesite (volume of 2 km Sample preparation was done at the Applied Geosciences Department, IPICYT (Instituto Potosino de Investigación Científica y Tecnológica). Samples were crushed in a jaw crusher and afterwards milled in an agate planetary mono mill. Petrographic and whole-rock geochemical analyses were performed on 15 samples of La Herradura rocks. Major element analyses were carried out by X-ray fluorescence with a PANalytical AXIOS Advanced sequential X-ray spectrometer at the Geoscience Center (GZG) of the University of Göttingen. Therefore, crushed and dried samples were mixed with a mixture of lithium tetraborate, lithium metaborate, and LiF (Fluxana FX-X65) and melted down to glass tablets. For the dilution 3900 mg of this flux and 1750 mg of the sample are weighed in platinum-gold crucibles and fused for 15 min at 1100 °C. All elements are analyzed using the SSTmAX-4-kW rhodium target X-ray tube for sample excitation. The Axios spectrometer is equipped with the SuperQ 4 software for data processing. For the analyses of major elements, the laboratory gives analytical precision better than 0.5–2% and detection limits of <3 ppm. The analyses of trace elements were obtained at the Geochemical Laboratory at the Geology Institute of the UASLP (Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí) with a Thermo Scientific Serie X2, Inducted Coupled Plasma- Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (ICP-QMS). For the analysis, 100 mg of the powered sample was digested with ultrex degree acids of HNO All analyses, major and trace elements, were validated by repeated independent sample preparation, blanks and analyses of two different international reference standards. Thin sections were prepared in Applied Geosciences Department, IPICYT and analyzed in the Unidad Michoacán of the Instituto de Geofísica of the UNAM. Thin sections were polished in two steps (3 and 1 μm) and vaporized with carbon. Major elements in plagioclase, clinopyroxene, orthopyroxene, hornblende, and garnet were analyzed using a JEOL JXA-8600 Electron Probe Microanalysis (EPMA). Analyses were made using 15 keV accelerating voltage and 10 nA beam current. The beam (spot resolution 1 μm) was focused to analyze plagioclase, pyroxenes, and garnets, but was defocused to 10 μm to analyze amphiboles, in order to avoid water loss and sodium migration. Measurements allow a spot resolution of 1–10 μm and a detection limit of <30 ppm. All elements with an atomic number Z ≥ 5 can be measured. U U Iolite software ( K Analytical results are given in For the geochemical analysis fresh, non-devitrified samples were used, the loss of ignition values (LOI at 1000 °C) ranging from 1.19 wt.% for the La Herradura Rhyolite to 3.71 wt.% for the El Sombrero Ignimbrite. The garnet-bearing rocks of La Herradura show a relatively narrow range of SiO Incompatible trace elements patterns, normalized to primitive mantle ( EPMA were performed to determine the end-member composition of plagioclases, pyroxenes, amphiboles, and garnet. Plagioclases from El Sombrero Ignimbrite have a representative composition of Oligoclase to Andesine (An = 19.59–41.54%, The plagioclases of the La Herradura Rhyolite have an average andesine composition with an anorthite content in between 34.34 and 48.23%. The orthoclase component is between 3.41 and 6.49%. All alkali feldspars of the rhyolite are sanidines, with higher orthoclase component (Or = 66.32–80.39%) similar to sanidine from El Sombrero Ignimbrite. The analyzed pyroxenes are all ferrosilite with molar magnesium numbers slightly higher compared to the El Sombrero Ignimbrite (Mg# = 0.24–0.29). The composition of garnets from the La Herradura Rhyolite is shown in EPMA were performed to determine the end-member composition of plagioclases, pyroxenes, and amphiboles on the Zaragoza Andesite. Plagioclase crystals show an average composition of andesine to labradorite (anorthite (An) = 38.30–48.40%). The orthoclase component is generally in between 5.90 and 8.85. For pyroxenes ( Geochemical modeling of the volcanic rocks from the La Herradura area was carried out using rhyolite-MELTS ( Rhyolite-MELTS simulations on the rhyolitic lavas from the La Herradura area (ZATT, El Sombrero Ignimbrite; LH5R, La Herradura Rhyolite) reveal nearly similar results as the mineral assemblage present in the rocks. The simulations show that garnet can crystallize from rhyolitic magmas at pressures of ≥7 kbar, but compared to the EPMA results ( Simulations on the crystallization of the andesitic magmas of the La Herradura area show different results compared to the mineral assemblage in the rock. For all investigated water contents (0.25, 0.50, 0.75 and 1.00 wt.% H Geochronological data are summarized in Concordant crystallization ages within the range of 32.26–31.32 Ma were obtained for all samples. Ages of 31.32 ± 0.97 (n = 27, MWSD = 4.6; LHVT; see A K The development of the (SMO) Mesa Central and its SE portion, the MC can be split into three main tectono-magmatic stages. First, a long phase of mainly andesitic to dacitic arc volcanism (45 Ma – 31 Ma) connected to the subduction of the Farallon plate that lasted until Eocene-Oligocene ( Regional geological and geophysical studies imply that in the southern and central part of the Mesa Central the crust has a thickness of approximately 30–33 km whereas the thickness of the crust to the west is 40–42 km and to the east 37 km ( The formation of the Oligocene to Miocene felsic and voluminous volcanic rocks in the MC and SMO is associated in space and time to the Basin and Range extensional province, which is delineated by normal faults and grabens with a general NW–SE to NE–SW orientation ( The concomitance of the felsic magmatic event and the extensional regime meant that fissure type volcanism occurred all over the MC and SMO and along some of the grabens and normal fault systems, the emplacement of rhyolitic ignimbrites and/or domes was associated with basaltic to andesitic lava flows forming bimodal volcanic suits ( The main characteristic of bimodal volcanism is the coalescence in time and space of felsic and mafic magmas. The magmas can be derived from either the same kind of source, due to differentiation of mafic magma (e.g. The volcanic rocks from La Herradura area show almost identical eruption ages, only the ages of the Zaragoza Andesite and El Sombrero Ignimbrite show slightly different ages. For the garnet-bearing La Herradura Rhyolite an age of 31.25 ± 0.7 Ma was determined, whereas an age of 32.18 ± 0.62 Ma was obtained for the Zaragoza Andesite and an age of 33.3 ± 0.43 Ma for El Sombrero Ignimbrite. The ages of the Zaragoza Andesite and of the garnet-bearing La Herradura are within uncertainty of each other ( The samples of the Zaragoza Andesite show enrichment in Cr, Ni, and Ba, while Sr and La show a depletion with increasing Mg#. The high contents of Cr and Ni in the Zaragoza Andesite are preserved characteristics from mantle-derived magma ( The relatively high SiO In summary, the geochemical data shows that the rhyolitic magmas were formed by a process involving partial melting of the lower crust most likely with the presence of fluids enriched in HFSE and LILE that show signatures of an intraplate fertile lithosphere and fractional crystallization of the magma during the ascent. In contrast, the andesitic magmas derived from partial melting of the upper-most crust and that during the ascent the magma stagnated at the crust-mantle boundary or the lower crust, where assimilation and fractional crystallization took place. Almandine-rich garnets from volcanic rocks can crystallize directly from Al-rich (peraluminous) silicic magmas as a liquidus or near liquidus phase at high pressures (7–18 kbar; e.g. The almandine garnet-bearing La Herradura Rhyolites do not contain any metamorphic crustal xenoliths and the garnets do not have any inclusions of metamorphic minerals (e.g. sillimanite, staurolite, and/or muscovite) that could indicate residual/xenocrystic origin. Furthermore, the garnets have in general sharp margins and are either euhedral or have rounded shapes. Almandine garnets poor in MnO, like the ones from La Herradura, are not stable at shallow depths ( If the garnet is a primary phase it limits the pressure and temperature conditions as well as the composition under that the magma can form at ( Considering the garnet is an early magmatic phase that was in equilibrium with the rhyolitic melt and is only present in the rhyolite, it is inferred that the garnet did not crystallize in a basic or intermediate magma and that the rhyolite could not have been derived from a basic magma by crystal fractionation. The geochemical features as well the set of inclusions in garnets from La Herradura Rhyolite are rather similar to those of the garnets in rhyolites from the Deh-Salm area, Iran ( Almandine garnet-bearing volcanic rocks are uncommon in the geologic record (e.g. Table 1 in The felsic domes from the southern part of the Mesa Central, near the study area, were generated by direct ascent of magmas from their generation zone at the base of the crust to the surface without temporary storage at intermediate depths ( Many authors describe similar geological settings for garnet-bearing volcanism worldwide. For example, The regional geological setting and the geochemical features of the studied rocks are widespread in the SMO and its south-eastern part, the MC ( Four major phases ( The authors want to thank Erasmo Mata Martínez from the UASLP and María Mercedes Zavala Arriaga from IPICYT for assistance with sample preparation. The authors also wish to thank Miguel Ángel Cortina Rangel for ICP-MS sample preparation and analytical data and the LINAN for SEM analyzes. The authors thank the financial support of the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at