The processes for recycling waste foundry sand are divided between regeneration and beneficial reuse, and the potential for regeneration is higher than that of reuse. In this study, two processes for the recycling and residue stabilization of waste foundry sands were considered. One is the dry mechanical process for recycling, and the other is the stabilization process for powdered residue. The dry mechanical process of regeneration consists of crushing, grinding, separation, and classification. To stabilize the residues that were generated through the regeneration process, powdered residues were pelletized by a high-shear pelletizer, and the surfaces of the pellets were subsequently coated with coal refuse powders that contained sodium silicate as a binder. Coated pellets were sintered by a self-propagating combustion method. The refractory index of the recycled sands, as measured by the Seger cone method, was over −34, and their SiO2 contents of 94% was similar to that of green sand. The general conclusion that coal refuse and sodium silicate stabilize heavy metals better than other processes may lead to the development of a cost-effective solution for stabilizing heavy metals in residues.Foundry sands are commonly used in casting processes by iron foundries to form molds in which molten iron is poured. After cooling, the sand molds are broken, and the finished iron products are removed. Either clay or chemically based binder is added to the sands to maintain the shape of the mold during pouring and cooling. Cast-iron foundries create a large quantity of waste: one quarter to one full ton of solid waste per casting Many methods have been developed to recover green sands for the production of molds and cores There are generally three methods for the recovery of green sand from WFS: thermal reclamation, wet reclamation and dry mechanical reclamation Despite the numerous efforts that have been undertaken regarding this question, few methods are economical in terms of efficiency and operational costs; hence, any successful stabilization process should be relatively cheap and sufficiently effective to ensure a sufficient advantage for its commercialization. Two different treatment processes were used in this work for the regeneration of WFS. The first process is a dry mechanical process that involves comminution using an impact and friction mechanism, magnetic separation to remove ferrous metals, and eddy current separation (ECS) to remove non-ferrous metals. The second process is a stabilization process for the residue that is generated by the first process. For the stabilization process, a self-propagating combustion method using coal refuse was used. In this study, three kinds of WFS were collected from major casting plants in South Korea. The chemical composition and heavy-metal contents of the samples were analyzed using XRF (XRF-1700, Shimadzu Co., Ltd., Japan) and ICP-MS (OPTIMA 5300DV, Perkin Elmer Co., Ltd., USA), respectively, to compare the WFS to green sand. All analyses were performed on dried samples that were obtained by heating the original samples for 2 Coal refuse, which is gangue matter that has been separated from coal during the coal preparation process, was obtained from the Hwasoon coal mine in South Korea and was used for self-propagating combustion. The coal type of the Hwasoon coal mine is anthracite. The fixed-carbon content of the coal refuse was analyzed by proximate analysis on a dry basis and was observed to be less than 15%. The process of recycling the waste foundry sand consisted of two stages. The first stage involved a recycling process [ The ECS that was used in this study consisted of a short conveyor that was driven from the feed end. A rapidly rotating system of permanent magnets, the pole system, which generates high-frequency changing magnetic fields, was incorporated into the head drum. These fields create strong eddy currents in non-ferrous metals, which enhance the metals’ opposing magnetic fields. The non-ferrous metal parts jump out of the remaining material flow. The permanent magnet of the ECS that was used in this study consisted of Nd-Fe-B and pure iron. After separation, the ground sample was subsequently sieved using a vibration screen with opening sizes of 0.075 A bottom-driven, high-shear granulator (HSG) was used to pelletize the powered residue, and the experimental conditions of the pelletization process were as follows: the flow rate of air was 1 The pellets were coated with a mixture of coal refuse and sodium silicate using the HSG. Sodium silicate was considered to be a binding agent and was used to decrease the sintering temperature of the coated pellets. The coated pellets were sintered using a self-propagating combustion method using fixed carbon in the shell of the pellet. The refractoriness index of the regenerated sand was measured via the Korean standard (KS) L-8001 method using Seger kegels (SK) and Seger cones The particle size distribution of the samples of WFS after being crushed by the jaw crusher and the gyratory crusher is depicted in  To remove ferrous metals from the ground WFS, magnetic separation was performed under applied magnetic fields of 3000 The chemical composition of the sand that was recycled at 3000 The refractoriness index of foundry sand is an important factor. Regenerated sand has to maintain sufficient refractoriness during casting. In order to be used as foundry sand, the refractoriness index of the regenerated sand should be equivalent to that of an SK of 33. An SK of 33 has a melting temperature of 1730 The heavy metals on the surfaces of the particles of the WFS were removed from the particles by friction and abrasion during comminution. The sizes of the separated heavy metal particles were finer than those of the raw particles of the WFS. Therefore, the residue that passed the 100-mesh screen (an opening size of 0.15 Many methods have been developed to stabilize heavy metals. In 1990, Holmes reported a method to quantify leachability with respect to the binders used in a comparative study of three separate solidification and stabilization (S/S) treatment technologies Despite numerous research studies, few researchers have addressed methods that are economical with respect to efficiency and operational costs. Therefore, any successful stabilization process should be relatively cheap and sufficiently effective to ensure an advantage for its commercialization. In this study, a self-propagating combustion method was used to stabilize heavy metals. We previously reported that self-propagating combustion is an effective sintering method for clay minerals To prepare the mixture, coal refuse was ground to a particle size of less than 0.075  The relationship between the compressive strength (CS) and added amount of sodium silicate at various sintering temperatures was investigated without coating the coal refuse. The point-load test was used to measure the CS of each sintered pellet. The point-load test is an effective method to determine the compressive strengths of irregularly shaped pellets   From the results depicted in The regeneration process and the stabilization process were considered as a suitable method for recycling of WFS: the regeneration process by comminution (crushing and grinding) and separation (magnetic separation at 3000 The sand regenerated under optimum conditions had a SiO In conclusion, it is adequately possible to replace green sand by the regenerated sand in the foundry industry and the self-propagation combustion could be used as an effective method to stabilize the residue. This research was supported by a Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 