The feasibility of using ultrasound to enhance the elution of gold from activated carbon was investigated. A laboratory-scale elution column immersed in an ultrasonic bath was used to investigate three eluant systems. The kinetic activity of the activated carbon was improved in the elution with sonication. Ultrasonic radiation improved the recoveries and kinetics of elution considerably. This could possibly be attributed to an increase in diffusive transport caused by acoustic vortex microstreaming and microjets, as well as the prevention of activated carbon fouling which can lead to the blockage of active sites. The rate of elution was significantly increased by the addition of ethanol to the aqueous eluant, especially in the presence of ultrasound. It could be attributed to the increased activity of smaller ions in preference to gold cyanide in the presence of ethanol. Ethanol, by capturing the primary radicals (H* and OH*), generated secondary radicals (C2H4OH*) which could be responsible for the increased efficiency. The introduction of ultrasound into the conventional elution systems made it possible to elute gold cyanide from activated carbon under less severe conditions.Activated carbon is the most widely used sorbent for gold recovery from cyanide solutions. One of the slowest steps in the extraction of gold by CIP/CIL techniques is the desorption of gold from the loaded activated carbon. The modern CIP/CIL process increasingly needs a rapid recycling of the carbon. The widely used elution procedure is the Zadra process, which recycles hot solutions of 1% w/v NaOH, 0.2% w/v NaCN through a gold cyanide loaded carbon bed for up to 72 h at 95–100 °C to desorb Au(CN) In view of low elution kinetics and high temperatures, it appears feasible to enhance conventional elution procedures by introducing ultrasound into the elution systems. The use of ultrasonics has recently been investigated as a means to intensify desorption processes. Synthetic gold solutions were prepared from KAu(CN) Laboratory gold loading was achieved by placing 200 g of conditioned dry carbon in contact with 5 l of a solution of KAu(CN) Kinetic activity tests were run using magnetically stirred solutions of 10 mg/l Au, 100 mg/l CN Artificially loaded carbon was eluted using the Zadra process in the presence of ultrasound. 20% v/v ethanol was added to the eluant to assist in the atmospheric elution. The elution results are shown in The rate of elution was significantly increased by the addition of ethanol to the Zadra eluant. The presence of ethanol increased the activity of smaller ions such as cyanide, in preference to larger ones, e.g. gold cyanide. This effect increased the efficiency of displacement of gold cyanide from carbon ( In the absence of ethanol, radicals such as H Dissolved oxygen was found to favour the adsorption of gold onto activated carbon from cyanide solutions ( In the presence of ultrasound, the eluant pH slightly increased from 12.9 to 13 and the tendency increased in the ethanol system. This could be attributed to the generation of the radicals The laboratory loaded carbon was pre-soaked in 20 ml of 10% w/v KCN, 1% w/v NaOH solution for about 1 h. The pre-soaked carbon was eluted with deionised water at 70 °C in the presence and absence of ultrasound. In comparison, tap water was also used in the elution tests. The elution results are shown in The Anglo method with deionised water after cyanide pre-soak normally operates at 110–120 °C and a slightly raised pressure ( This elution process substituted the less toxic and less corrosive sodium carbonate for the sodium hydroxide–sodium cyanide desorption mixture. The laboratory loaded carbon was eluted with 5 g/l sodium carbonate solution at 70 °C in the presence and absence of ultrasound. The eluant pH was about 10.2 at 70 °C. 20% v/v ethanol was also added to assist in the atmospheric elution with sodium carbonate. The elution results are shown in The elution with carbonate medium occasionally operates at 140 °C and a raised pressure ( In the absence of ultrasound, the kinetics of the elution with the carbonate eluant were relatively slow, and the elution curves were flat without showing obvious peaks, as indicated in The plant loaded carbon was eluted with three different eluants at 70 °C in the presence and absence of ultrasound. The eluants included a mixture of 0.1% w/v KCN, 1% w/v NaOH and 20% v/v ethanol, deionised water and a mixture of 5 g/l sodium carbonate and 20% v/v ethanol. The carbon to be eluted with deionised waster was pre-soaked in 20 ml of 10% w/v KCN and 1% w/v NaOH solution for about 1 h. The elution results are shown in As can be seen from The kinetic activity of carbon is an important factor in the performance of carbon adsorption. In order to investigate the activity of the plant carbon subjected to sonication, re-adsorption tests were conducted following elution. The plant loaded carbon was eluted with the above three methods at 90 °C to ensure that the elution was complete by increasing the elution times and eluant volumes. After elution, the gold content of the carbon was around 30–50 mg/kg. The eluted carbon was treated with 5% HNO Carbon fouling is one of the major factors causing the loss of the activity of carbon. The build-up of organic and inorganic substances on carbon will detrimentally affect gold adsorption. Fouling could occur in the following three cases: (1) undesirable organic or inorganic species are adsorbed onto the carbon surface, taking up active sites which would otherwise be available for gold adsorption; (2) inorganic salts are precipitated onto the carbon surface, blocking active sites; and (3) solid particles or precipitates are physically trapped in carbon pores, restricting access to gold-bearing solution. Many inorganic foulants can be removed by acid washing, whereby the precipitated salts are dissolved in dilute mineral acid and then rinsed from the carbon. Organic species, e.g., diesel oil, flotation reagents and humic acid can adsorb onto carbon via hydrogen bonding and van der Waals attraction. The adsorption of organic species can lead to a significant proportion of the carbon surface area being inaccessible to gold cyanide species, resulting in a decreased adsorption rate and final gold loading. Organic fouled carbon can be regenerated by heating to 650–750 °C in a non-oxidising atmosphere. It was indicated that conventional elution methods could not prevent the build-up of inorganic and organic substances on carbon, resulting in loss of carbon activities. However, it is expected that the elution with ultrasound could reduce the deposition of foulants on carbon, and hence improve the kinetic activities of the carbon. The adsorption of gold cyanide onto activated carbon is dependent upon many chemical and physical factors which affect the adsorption kinetics. The initial rate of adsorption of gold cyanide is rapid, with adsorption occurring at the most accessible sites in macro-pores, and possibly meso-pores, but the kinetics decrease as equilibrium is approached. Under these conditions the rate is controlled by the mass transport of gold cyanide species to the activated carbon surfaces. However, once this adsorption capacity has been utilised, a pseudo-equilibrium is established beyond which adsorption must take place in the micro-pores ( It is well established that ultrasound driven cavitation events cause chemical and physical effects in a liquid medium ( In addition to the ‘hot spot’ effect, ultrasound also causes mechanical effects, which can be either “macroscopic” caused by the acoustic streaming or “microscopic” caused by microjets ( The ‘hot spot’ effect in cavitation generates localised high temperatures and pressures, which could effectively remove organic foulants through the sonolysis of macromolecule foulants and the increase of the foulant solubility during elution. These organic foulants could otherwise be removed by thermal regeneration at a higher temperature. In addition, the mechanical effects induced by cavitation could also remove organic residues, inorganic precipitates or entrapped particles from the carbon pores. As a consequence, the elution with ultrasound increased the kinetic activity of carbon, as observed in the tests. The results in this work were obtained under the preset conditions using three different eluants. These elution conditions were not optimised for the specific systems. The use of ultrasonics for the enhancement of elution appeared to be promising, with regard to less severe operating conditions, higher efficiency and improved activities of carbon. However, further work is necessary to optimise these systems and to obtain a better perspective of comparative cost-advantages. The practical application of sonochemistry in carbon elution is dependent upon successful scaling up of laboratory results for industrial use. Further work involving scaling up of the laboratory results is presently being conducted, and several configurations are being considered. One of the best configurations appears to be a flow type ultrasonic reactor. Such an arrangement allows the ultrasonic dose of energy entering the elution chamber to be controlled by transducer power input and flow rate (residence time), while dispensing with the need for temperature control. The feasibility of the use of ultrasound for the improvement of elution of gold cyanide from activated carbon was demonstrated. Elution of both the laboratory and plant loaded carbon with different eluants was enhanced considerably by sonication at 40 kHz, when compared with similar systems not sonicated. The use of ultrasound made it possible to elute gold cyanide from activated carbon under less severe conditions, e.g., lower temperatures and pressures and less sensitivity to water quality in the case of water elution. The enhancement of elution by ultrasound could be attributed to the physical and chemical effects as well as mechanical effects induced by ultrasonic cavitation. The addition of ethanol into the eluants increased the kinetics and recoveries of elution, especially in the presence of ultrasound. Ethanol could not only reduce the threshold for cavitation, but also capture the primary radicals to form secondary radicals beneficial for the desorption of gold. The elution with ultrasound increased the kinetic activity of carbon. This could be attributed to the removal of foulants by ultrasound. The ‘hot spot’ effect in cavitation generates localised high temperatures and pressures, which could effectively remove organic foulants during elution. These organic foulants could otherwise be removed by thermal regeneration. In addition, the mechanical effects induced by cavitation could also remove organic residues, inorganic precipitates or entrapped particles from the carbon pores. The financial support from the Melbourne Research Grant Scheme is gratefully acknowledged.