Brightness (R457) is the main quality parameter in the production of ground calcium carbonate (GCC) slurries for the paper industry. In order to study how the presence of trace amounts of pyrrhotite (Fe(1−
                     
                        x
                     
                     )S) and pyrite (FeS2) affect the brightness of GCC slurries, experiments were performed in which a high quality calcite concentrate was spiked with these sulphides prior to micronisation and subsequent spectrophotometric measurements. The results show that even very small additions (<0.05wt%) have a significant detrimental effect on the brightness of the product. Pyrrhotite reduces the brightness of the product more than pyrite, probably as an effect of differences in inherent optical reflectivity, specific surface area after micronisation and smearing. In addition, the experiment shows that when brightness is presented as a function of iron concentration, magnetite (Fe3O4) produces a different result compared to the sulphides. This indicates that a simple iron analysis is not sufficient to predict brightness of the GCC slurry when several iron-bearing minerals are present. The particle size distribution of the contaminant phase has proven to have a significant effect, as brightness is reduced when the contamination becomes more finely distributed.Minerals are found in nearly every grade of paper, as filler or coating. Both applications are widely used to improve optical properties and surface properties of paper, such as brightness, opacity, gloss, dimensional stability, printability and writeability ( One of the most common pigments used for fillers in paper is ground calcium carbonate (GCC). This pigment is derived from naturally occurring calcite which is purified, usually by flotation, followed by subsequent micronisation to produce very fine grained (<3 Norsk Mineral is a Norwegian company and a major supplier of raw material for GCC production. The subsidiary Brønnøy Kalk operates the Akselberg open pit deposit in Brønnøysund, 250 Although it is known that sulphides reduce the brightness of the product, it is still of great importance to utilise the sulphide bearing marble, as the calcite content is >98%. It is estimated that this comprises approximately 10% of the marble deposit. In order to optimise the recovery from the deposit, it is essential to gain more knowledge on the colouring properties of these sulphides. The objective of this paper is to determine how and to what extent the sulphides found in the Akselberg deposit affect brightness of the GCC slurry. It is of particular interest to determine the critical level of sulphides that will compromise product quality. By adding small amounts of pyrrhotite and pyrite to purified calcite concentrate, followed by micronisation and subsequent brightness measurements, the colouring effect of the respective sulphide phases is studied. Initial experiments to study the effect of particle size and the extent of surface oxidation have also been performed. As the pyrrhotite and pyrite samples were retrieved from massive sulphide lenses in the Akselberg open pit deposit, the sulphide grains were not enclosed in calcite marble. Particle liberation analysis on the liberation between sulphides and calcite were therefore not required in this study. The samples in this study were collected from the Akselberg deposit. Calcite marble was handpicked, with the focus on obtaining the purest sample available. Respective samples of pyrrhotite and pyrite were handpicked from the massive sulphide lenses. The magnetite concentrate (Fe Crushing and dry milling of the sample was carried out using a jaw crusher with 3 The chemical composition of the calcite concentrate was determined by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), using a Bruker AXS S8 Tiger equipped with wavelength dispersive spectrometer. Element analysis were obtained using a pressed powder disk. The mineralogy of the calcite concentrate was then calculated from the XRF analysis. The results are shown in The pyrite and pyrrhotite samples were crushed using a jaw crusher with 3 The mineralogy of the three sulphide concentrates: pyrite, monoclinic pyrrhotite and hexagonal pyrrhotite were determined by XRD, using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer with a Krystalloflex K780 Generator, scanning from 2° to 80° (2 In order to limit oxidation, the sulphide concentrate samples were sealed in plastic bags and placed in a freezer immediately after milling (pyrite) or magnetic separation (pyrrhotite) until needed for the experiment. In addition, as a contrast to the unoxidised samples, a few highly oxidised samples were also produced. This was achieved by placing 1 In order to facilitate an initial study of particle size effect on brightness, two very fine fractions of the pyrite concentrate (i.e. <5 The original magnetite sample was subjected to dry sieving in order to retrieve the 45–100 Grindability tests on the contaminant material (pyrite, pyrrhotite and magnetite) were conducted using the Fritsch P6 Pulverizette planetary mono mill. All concentrates were milled dry at 400 Micronisation of the calcite concentrate was conducted in a custom made stirred mill, equipped with a 2000 In order to test the effect of iron contamination, small amounts of the respective contaminant concentrates, i.e. the sulphides and the magnetite, were added separately to the calcite concentrate immediately prior to micronisation. Four levels of contamination were chosen, corresponding to 0.01, 0.02, 0.05 and 0.1 The micronised slurries were then dried in a Panasonic microwave oven at 1800 Following deagglomeration, a powder tablet of each dried micronised product was prepared with a pneumatic press. Great care was taken to ensure that the surfaces of the tablets were smooth and free from scratches. The pressed tablets were subjected to spectrophotometric measurements at room temperature using an Elrepho Datacolor 600 spectrophotometer equipped with a xenon flash lamp, filtered to produce an incident light spectrum similar to the CIE Standard Illuminant D65 ( Several parameters were calculated from the measurements of the light reflected from the pressed tablets. The reflected light R457 was used as a measure of brightness (STD R457/T525 UV according to the standard TAPPI 525 ( It is evident that the addition of small amounts of the respective sulphide concentrates have a pronounced effect on brightness, as can be seen in The striking feature in the results presented in Furthermore, it is clear that brightness decreases more rapidly with more extensive micronisation. In general, the brightness of the grade 90 product as a function of contamination level is 2% points lower than that of the grade 60 product. Varying the extent of micronisation will in itself display a difference in brightness, even when no contamination is added. With no addition of sulphides, the grade 60 product has an average brightness of 96.7% Prior to micronisation it is plausible to assume that the surface of the calcite concentrate will be depleted in graphite relative to the bulk of the particles, due to the natural hydrophobic properties of graphite, i.e. fully liberated grains of graphite are easily floated. In addition, it is assumed that also a high proportion of calcite grains with inclusions of graphite floats, when graphite is exposed on the grain boundaries. An average acid soluble content of approximately 50 In addition, the surface characteristics of the pressed tablet used in the brightness measurements will affect the brightness. Incident light beamed onto the specimen surface is reflected in specular and diffuse reflection. In the case of diffuse reflection the incident light is reflected in many angles which give the perception of pigment colour, while specular reflection is the reflection in only one angle, perceived as gloss. By increasing the surface roughness, the scatter of specular reflectance is increased and the diffuse reflectance is diluted. Textured surfaces will therefore appear lighter ( The results from adding oxidised samples of the respective sulphide concentrates did not give any significant differences in brightness compared to non-oxidised samples, i.e. the curves completely coincide ( The results indicate that the addition of pyrrhotite reduces the brightness of the micronised grade 90 products more than pyrite. Simultaneously, there seems to be no significant difference between the two phases of pyrrhotite. It should be noted that the monoclinic pyrrhotite concentrate is a mix of both monoclinic and hexagonal phases, as shown in Student Some of the observed difference in the brightness between samples contaminated with pyrite and pyrrhotite respectively, could be attributed to the different inherent optical properties. The reflectivity of pyrrhotite at 460 By spectrophotometric measurements several colouring parameters are found, as described in Section By adding two different fractions of pyrite, (<5 As shown in The difference in colouring effect by sulphides and magnetite, can be caused several effects. As shown in As shown in Section For systems that follows the Kubelka–Munk model, the The additive property of the Kubelka–Munk function means that a plot of Brightness is the main quality parameter in the production of ground calcium carbonate (GCC) used as filler in the paper industry. By spiking a high quality calcite concentrate with various iron-bearing contaminant phases prior to micronisation and subsequently performing spectrophotometric measurements on the resulting slurries, it was found that even very small amounts of pyrrhotite and pyrite have a significant detrimental effect on the brightness of the product. Product quality is compromised at contaminant concentrations as low as 0.01–0.05 Pyrrhotite produces a more bluish tint and reduces the brightness of the slurry more than pyrite. The latter is probably due to pyrrhotite’s lower inherent optical reflectance, but possibly also due to smearing effects and differences in grindability. The brightness is reduced as the contaminant phase becomes more finely distributed in the calcite slurry. This factor suggests itself as the main explanation for the deviating results found when adding magnetite. In spite of having an inherent optical reflectance that is lower than those of pyrite and pyrrhotite, magnetite produces a significantly lower reduction in brightness. Results from grindability tests strongly indicate that the sulphide phases will become more finely distributed during micronisation. The results show how the brightness of the slurry depends on a number of factors, and that the colouring properties of the contaminant phases vary. As a consequence, facing ever stricter quality requirements, GCC producers will undoubtedly benefit from establishing site-specific empirical data bases describing the optical response of the various contaminating phases in their raw materials. The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the Research Council of Norway and Norsk Mineral A.S. Several persons have contributed in this experiment and the autors are grateful to the staff at the laboratory of Brønnøy Kalk A.S, especially Anne Berit Hansen and Brita Lünser for substantial help with practical analysis. Also Dr. Bjørn Eske Sørensen and Torill Sørløkk at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway, must be thanked for help with the characterisation of samples using XRD and XRF, and Irene Bragstad at Sintef for performing the Coulter and BET analysis.