With regard to the immense importance of cut-off grade in designing and planning open pit mines, optimizing this parameter has considerable effects in mining economic. This paper describes objective function for single metal mines with multi-product. For this purpose, the operation process in mine No.1 of the Golgohar iron mine that produces three types of products (sizing, concentrate and pellet) for sales is used to model objective function. Then the Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA) has been utilized to find out the optimum cut-off grades. Consequently, the optimum cut-off grades has been calculated between 40.5 and 47.5% and net present value has been obtained 18,142 billion Rial. In addition, production scheduling is carried out for five years mining plan pushback. Therefore, the average stripping ratio has been determined 1.41. The result shows that by stockpiling low-grade ore, concentrate plant can be fed by maximum capacity for one year addition to the primary plan.In open pit mines, cut-off grade is used to discriminate ore from waste. It is one of the most crucial decisions that must be faced by mine engineers. If the mineral grade is equal to or above cut-off grade, the material is classified as ore and if the grade of mineral is less than the cut-off grade, the material is classified as waste. Depending upon the mining method, waste is either left in situ or sent to the waste dumps, whereas ore is sent to the treatment plant for further processing and eventual sale ( Due to the dependency of the many economical and operational parameters to the cut-off grade, it is one of the most critical factors in open pit mining. Hence optimizing cut-off grade has several results in the economy, designing and planning of operation. On the other hand, cut-off grade affects production planning through its influence on the ore quantity. Therefore, some researchers take cut-off grade as an internal decision variable in their production scheduling schemes ( From 1954 to now many theories for this subject has presented and various algorithms have used to solve this problem. The basic algorithm to determine the cut-off grades that maximize the NPV of an operation subject to mining, milling, and refining capacities was proposed by Lane ( Ataei and Osanloo developed a method to find out the optimum cut-off grade for multiple metal deposits. First, they defined objective function for multiple metal deposits and then they used golden section search method and equivalent factor to solve the optimization problem ( Despite the existence of a lot of research and studies on this field, up to now, no study has been carried out to determine optimum cut-off grade for single metal with multi-product. Whereas the majority of open pit mines around the world, it produces different types of product. In addition, in a few studies, researches, design and planning of open pit mines, the production scheduling based on the optimum cut-off grades has been considered and conducted. Regarding to these deficiencies and shortcomings, this paper develops an objective function for optimizing cut-off grade in multi products mines and presents production scheduling based on it. Other innovation of this paper is in which a newest and easier meta-heuristic algorithm is used. For this purpose, mine No.1 of the Golgohar iron mine has been considered. Golgohar Mining and Industry Company is the biggest iron ore mine in Iran and produces three types of products including sizing ore, concentrate and pellet. Therefore, at first cost, revenue and cash flow equations based on the situation of this mine, were determined and then objective function for determination of optimum cut-off grade based on the maximizing the NPV of future cash flow was defined. Due to the complexity of the objective function, ICA was used to find out optimum cut off grades. This method was carried out for five years production plans to determine the optimum cut-off grade strategy, amount of material that must be sent to each unit, amount of selling product, cash flow and total NPV based on the future cash flow.  As described before, mining company produces three types of products; therefore, the revenue of each of them can be defined as follow: On the other hand, there are five forms of cost including mining, concentrating, pelletizing, sizing and fix cost. Equations for each of them are shown in below respectively: By using the revenue and the cost, the operation cash flow (profit) can be defined as: By substituting the cost and revenue in the Eq. Since the amount of concentrate depends on input tonnage, recovery, and ore average grade ( By considering Eq. As shown in  By assuming that just prior to mining increment The present value at time Since the present value at time Eq. Applying the binomial expansion to the term For Combining Eqs. Comparing Eqs. Substituting Eq. One would now like to schedule the mining in such a way that the decline in remaining present value takes place as rapidly as possible. This is because later profits get discounted more than those captured earlier. In examining Eq. In this paper the capacity of each unit including mining, concentrating and pelletizing can be constrained the operation, consequently three form of Eq. Now, for any cut-off grade, it is possible to calculate the corresponding Since the objective functions of this problem is non-linear, three methods can be used to solve it: analytical, numerical, and meta-heuristic. These methods will discribes in the next section. In Equations that show in If only one capacity is dominant, the limiting economic maximization may be accomplished analytically. To find the grades that maximize the NPV under different constraints, one first takes the derivative Equations in Equations in the As can be seen in the A function f (x) is unimodal if (i) x Because the Other group of methods for solving this optimization problem is meta-heuristic algorithms. Different meta-heuristic algorithms have been proposed for solving an optimization problem. Most of these methods are inspired by modeling natural processes. In 2007 the ICA proposed by “Atashpaz Gargari” that inspired by the imperialist competition. This algorithm contrary to conventional evolutionary methods is not based on phenomenon from the nature. The ICA uses socio-political evolution of human as a source of inspiration for developing a strong optimization strategy. Especially, this algorithm considers imperialism as a level of human social evolution and by mathematically modeling this complicated political and historical process, it arrives at a tool for evolutionary optimization ( This paper used the meta-heuristic algorithm because its flexibility in address with given conditions and priority and high speed in a one variable non-linear problems. For this purpose, the ICA selected. The main reason for choosing this algorithm is attractiveness this algorithm because of the novelty of its idea. Moreover, this algorithm has ability to compete with other well-known algorithms (e.g. genetic algorithm, simulated annealing, and particle swarm optimization) in terms of speed and ease of use. On the other hand, increasing the successful use of it in the areas of engineering is other reason for choosing it.  From another point of view, the normalized power of an imperialist is the portion of colonies that should be possessed by that imperialist. Then the initial number of colonies of an empire will be: The colonies in each of the empire start moving towards their imperialist, based on the assimilation policy. The total power of an empire is defined by the imperialist's power and percentage of the colony's power. Therefore, the total cost defines by:  By defining above equations, the imperialist competition begins. All empires try to take the colonies of other empires under their control. The imperialistic competition will gradually result in an increase in the power of powerful empires and a decrease in the power of weaker empires. This results in the collapse of weak empires. To start the competition, first one must find the possession probability of each empire based on its total power. The normalized total cost is simply obtained by: Finally, these processes will successfully cause all the countries to converge to a situation in which there exists only one empire in the world and all the other countries are colonies of that empire and they have the same position and power as the imperialist ( In Equations that show in The values of economical parameters in The algorithmic iterations continue in anticipation of the NPV convergence, i.e. the calculation of the optimum cut-off grade for a period Introduce the candidate optimum grade by ICA and do next steps for each one Set iteration Compute available reserves If available reserves are equal to zero, then stop all processes, otherwise go to next step If Compute ore and waste tonnage  limiting capacity and mine life (n) based on the {min[v  cash flow using Eq.  Compare Back to the ICA process Determine the optimum cut-off grade for current year based on the ICA process Calculate value of Update grade tonnage distribution based on the values of step 10 and show results Based on the above algorithm the final empire in each year for ICA is optimum cut-off grade. The parameters of ICA selected based on the previous study of the author about performance of it in this field and then tuned for this situation ( It should be noted as previous mentioned The results show that all capacities and priorities of the mine are respected and there is good accordance with the mine condition. Cut-off grades and NPV for each year of plan is shown in By comparing the updated grade-tonnage distribution in the end of each year with beginning of the same year, the extraction rate of each grade interval could be calculated. In addition, by considering amount of waste in grade-tonnage distribution with grade 0–40.5%, the extraction rate of waste could be determined. Result of this calculation is shown in the After determining the extraction rate, amount of stripping ratio for each year is calculated and the result is shown in As can be seen in With regard to In this paper determination of the optimum cut-off grades and production scheduling for Golgohar iron mine in which three types of material is produced, has been carried out using Imperialist Competitive Algorithm (ICA). For this purpose, at first the Lane's method has been modified and objective function based on the maximizing the NPV of future cash flow has been defined to determine optimum cut-off grade. Then, ICA has been used to find out optimum cut off grades. Consequently, the optimum cut-off grades has been calculated between 40.5 and 47.5% and net present value has been obtained 18,142 billion Rial for five years mining plan pushback. In the next step, based on the optimum cut-off grade of each year, the production scheduling has been carried out. Finally, by stockpiling low-grade ore, the processing plant can be fed one year over to the primary plan. The results have been confirmed by bureau of design supervision and consulting of Golgohar because of adheres to all capacities, priority and condition of mines in the achieved results than the default practical 5-years plan. The authors are grateful to the Golgohar Mining and Industrial Co. and Golgohar Iron Ore and Steel Research Institute to their supporting and conducting this research. see