In this paper, an integrated attitude control scheme is proposed for a statically unstable hypersonic vehicle (HSV) with low-frequency aero-servo-elastic effect. Linear active disturbance rejection control (LADRC) is designed for the pitch angle to address the strong uncertainties and coupling effects. For the particular aero-servo-elastic effect with low frequency, a hybrid phase and gain stabilization technique is embedded into the LADRC framework to suppress the structural modes, which can reduce the phase loss around the crossover frequency. To achieve satisfactory tracking performance and robustness, a non-smooth 
                        
                           
                              H
                           
                           
                              ∞
                           
                        
                      optimization approach is applied to tune the controller gains, which simplifies the tuning and gain scheduling process. Monte Carlo simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed control scheme.The demands of high flight velocity and exploitation in near space are driving the development of hypersonic vehicle (HSV). In the 1960's, National aeronautics and space administration (NASA) started the research of the scramjet propulsion system, which is the key technique of hypersonic flight. With the success of the scramjet-powered Mach 7 and 10 flights of X-43A in 2004 Different from conventional flight vehicles, there are three main challenges in the control of the air-breathing HSV: It is extremely difficult to get an accurate model of the HSV due to the intricate aero-thermo-elastic-propulsion interactions The longitudinal dynamics of the HSV may be statically unstable due to the propulsion/airframe integration design, and a high-bandwidth controller is necessary for the stabilization of the unstable short-period modes. However, the low-frequency aero-servo-elastic modes, which are caused by the slender configuration and lightweight airframe, can be excited by such a high-bandwidth controller and the stability may be violated The HSV has fast time-varying dynamics within a wide flight envelope. The controller is required to realize satisfactory performance over the entire range of operating points, which makes the design process even more complicated and time-consuming Regarding the aforementioned challenges, many methods have been proposed. Linear parameter varying control Motivated by the challenges and the analysis mentioned above, an integrated attitude control scheme, which incorporates LADRC, hybrid phase and gain stabilization and non-smooth The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The HSV model and the corresponding control problem are formulated in Section The HSV model studied in this paper is a curve fitted control-oriented model proposed by As illustrated in In practical HSV control, the flight profile is designed first and then characteristic points on the profile are selected for the inner-loop attitude controller design. The tracking control of the altitude and velocity can be designed and analyzed separately since the long-period dynamics is much slower than the short-period dynamics especially for the hypersonic flight There are two control actuators: one elevator and one canard for the pitch angle control in this model. First, the canard deflection To deal with the fast time-varying dynamics, strong nonlinearities, coupling effects and uncertainties of the HSV model, LADRC is employed here for the attitude control. Combining equations In the aforementioned controller design process, it assumes that the rigid-body states can be obtained directly for the feedback. However in practice, the flexible deformation at the sensor position is significant for the HSV and can not be ignored. Denote Taking Laplace transform of equations For the HSV model used in this paper, the separation of the rigid and the flexible modes can be performed through neglecting the aero-elastic effect which is rather weak compared with the servo-elastic effect as shown in From the above analysis, it can be concluded that the flexible modes can realize self-stabilization when Usually, the nose of HSV is occupied by specific payloads, and the rate gyro can only be placed in the forebody. In this paper, the sensor is placed at The entire design process of the pitch attitude controller is proposed as aforementioned. The control block diagram is shown in To tune the parameters, the small-perturbation linearized model of the HSV is given first by The non-smooth First, the closed-loop performance transfer functions that are to be optimized need to be determined. The total control scheme is shown in In this section, several numerical simulations are used to validate the efficiency of the proposed control scheme. The specifications of system within the entire flight envelope are shown in The optimized results are depicted in Next, some nonlinear simulations are conducted to validate the effectiveness of the proposed control scheme. A square-wave command is given to the pitch angle. The FER is set at its maximum. The wind effect is included in the simulation. The angle of attack measurement As aforementioned, this paper mainly focuses on the attitude loop, thus the command design of the pitch angle aims to make the flight profile cover the admissible range of altitude and attitude angles (after calculation, the actual maximal angle of attack achieved by the maximal control deflections is 5.9 Furthermore, to demonstrate the robustness of the control scheme, some parametric uncertainties are included together with the wind disturbance. Since the fuel-consumption model has not been established yet, the dynamic model of the structural frequency can not be determined. Thus, 100 Monte Carlo nonlinear simulations are run for each fuel level in This paper presented a synthesis of attitude control for an unstable HSV with low-frequency aero-servo-elastic effect. LADRC was designed for the HSV to deal with the strong uncertainties which involve unmodeled dynamics, parameter uncertainties, coupling effect and external disturbances. Phase stabilization method was integrated into the LADRC scheme, and the condition that the structural mode could be phase stabilized was given. According to the mode shape analysis at the rate gyro sensor, the first structural mode could be well phase stabilized, thus the phase margin can be improved highly. The non-smooth There is no conflict of interest. Research was supported in part by the