Accurate determination of in situ stress magnitude and orientation is an essential element of the design process of all underground openings. A stress calculation method was proposed for the new stress measurement technique using the borehole slotter device. Two major objectives were the focus of this research work. The first goal was to simulate the slotter test process numerically and delve into the mechanisms involved in this test. A precise 3D numerical model of a typical slotter test condition was constructed using the FLAC3D code. The effects of variations in rock mass deformation modulus on the strain/stress relieve, and thus borehole slotter test results, were investigated numerically. The second objective of the work was to employ 3D modelling in the interpretation of slotter field tests conducted at Bakhtiari dam site. These tests were aimed at determining the stress magnitude and orientation to be used in the design of underground chambers and tunnels associated with Bakhtiari dam. The stress regimes measured in field were applied as boundary condition on the constructed 3D model and a backward analysis was conducted. For each case the actual strain field measured was compared against strain field calculated numerically. Accordingly, the boundary condition (stress magnitude and orientation) associated with the model results that provided the best fit to the measured data was determined as the governing stress regime. A good agreement was achieved between numerical and field test results. The obtained numerical results provided valuable insights in selecting the governing in situ stress condition from a set of recorded field data.Knowledge of in situ stress distribution within ground is an essential design component of underground openings and tunnels. The magnitude and orientation of in situ stress components significantly affect the stability of underground openings and may lead to severe stress concentrations and failures around the opening. With regard to the complex nature of earth geology, measurement of ground stresses has always been a difficult task. Various methods have been developed to measure the in situ stress regime within the ground. These methods can be broadly categorized into strain relief, hydro fracturing, borehole breakout, and seismic methods. Borehole slotting (a strain relief method) is a relatively new stress measuring technique which is designed for quick operation in boreholes and for high density measurements at reasonable cost ( The slotter technique has proven reliable in the field and has had certain commercial successes ( The borehole slotter test is based on the principle of local stress relieve. In this test, a pneumatically driven diamond saw is used to create slots of up to 25 Before, during, and after slotting the circumferential strain is measured at the borehole wall in the vicinity of the slot. The tangential strain is measured by a specially developed recoverable strain sensor ( The first objective of this study was to numerically simulate the borehole slotter test and look into the mechanisms involved in the test. Moreover, the effect of rock mass modulus on the test results was evaluated. The intension was to model the test procedure as precise as possible. Accordingly, a sophisticated 3D model of the test condition was constructed. The advanced 3D finite difference code FLAC3D was used for the modelling. This code is a product of ITASCA consulting Inc. ( The built-in programming capability of FLAC3D was used to generate a high resolution and accurate mesh. This enabled the modelling of slot arrangement and stress change/strain relieve happening in the borehole wall during the slot cutting process. In order to simulate the saw cutting process, the slot was modelled using the crescent shaped zones. The slot model was built such that the slot cutting process could be simulated in six consecutive stages. Therefore, the progressive cutting of slot and associated stress relieve in the slot vicinity were modelled fairly realistic. The advantage of modelling the slot sawing process is that the exact depth, in which stresses are completely relived, for a given condition, can be determined. This knowledge can help in the selection of appropriate instrument type and saw dimension. With regard to the conditions and nature of borehole slotter test, the material (isotropic, homogeneous) behavior was assumed to be linear elastic. Selection of an elastic/isotropic model reduced the modelling complexities (input data) and eased the verification and judgment of numerical results. Therefore, it was assumed that the rock mass surrounding the slotter test location behaves in an elastic manner during the test. In order to simulate the process, the rock mass Poisson’s ratio and modulus of elasticity were assumed to be 0.25 and 10 As mentioned previously, the slot cutting process was simulated in six consecutive stages. Having the full stress tensor from the FLAC3D results, a fish (built-in programming language) routine was written to calculate the tangential stress around the test hole and produce contours of stress change and relieve at the end of each stage. In the first set of analysis, the slot cutting process and associated stress change were modelled and obtained results were interpreted. Moreover, the effect of variations in rock mass modulus of elasticity on the slotter test results was investigated. In the second phase of the work the in situ borehole slotter test carried out at Bakhtiari dam site were simulated and numerical findings were compared against field data. The following sections present the analysis results. In order to evaluate the constructed model and adapted modelling approach a typical slotter test was simulated. A vertical slot in a test hole wall was considered and a 10 In order to further delve into the slotter test mechanisms and stress relieve process, the effect of rock modulus on the test results was examined. Maintaining a typical slotter test condition, the rock mass modulus was varied and stress relieve was monitored as a function of slot cutting. With regard to this figure in low modulus rock, the strain relieve occurs at a much faster rate. With increase in rock modulus, the strain relieve occurs in a more gradual manner. Moreover, the results show that a large portion of strain relieves within the initial stages of the cutting and after a certain slot depth no significant strain relieve occurs. Accordingly, for a given rock mass the optimum slot depth for the slotter test can be determined by the proposed numerical simulation approach. Looking at The Bakhtiari dam hydraulic structures are located in Zagros mountain range in south west of Andimeshk city-Iran. This concrete dam structure is designed to have over 315 The slotter test program at Bakhtiari dam was aimed at evaluating the in situ stress field. In each slotter test the principal stresses are measured in a plane perpendicular to the borehole axis. Typically, one principal stress component is vertical and the other two components are horizontal. It should be realized that in the tectonically complex regions of the earth there may be a change in the orientation of all three principal stress components, but the tectonic regime at Bakhtiari was such that the assumption of a vertical orientation for one principal stress component was valid. All borehole slotter tests were performed in limestone (main host rock). To conduct the borehole slotter test a vertical hole was bored in an exploration gallery and in total 10 measurements (slot test) were carried out. Two of the conducted tests were unsuccessful. The results obtained from the other eight measurements were used for the determination of in situ stresses. Based on final test results, four sets of principal stress components (magnitude and direction) were calculated. With regard to the discussion given above, the measured data by the slotter test was processed employing the software provided by the device manufacturer (INTERFELS Corp.). Accordingly, four configurations of in situ stress components ( In order to identify the governing magnitude and orientation of in situ stress components, an extensive numerical modelling exercise was carried out. The measured stress values were imposed as boundary condition on the model and strain field variation was simulated numerically as a function of slotting process (as described in Section Three alternative sets of field results which were believed to be closer to the actual field stress condition were analyzed numerically. As an illustration model no. 1 was run with three slot configurations. The slots were 120° apart and were oriented from the north. The slot configurations modelled were 0-120-240 ( Looking at Similarly, other modelling alternatives ( For each case the actual stain field measured were compared against strain field calculated numerically. Accordingly, the boundary condition (stress magnitude and orientation) associated with the model results that provided the best fit to the measured data was determined as the governing stress regime. A summary of all numerical results is presented graphically in Looking at The difference between numerical and field results is due to variations in rock mass properties in the slot vicinities. In the conducted modelling work, rock mass was assumed to be homogeneous and uniform. In this work, the mechanisms involved in the slotter test were simulated numerically. The analysis result shows that numerical modelling can be used to determine the optimum slot depth beyond which no strain relief occurs. This is an important issue from the saw wearing point of view in this test. The effect of variations in rock mass modulus on the slotter test results was investigated. Analysis findings show that this parameter affects only the strain release rate around the slot and for a given stress ratio change in elasticity modulus does not influence the overall amount of stress release around the slot. The validity of stress calculations from the borehole slotter tests conducted at the Bakhtiari dam project site was evaluated numerically. From four sets of principal stress magnitudes/azimuths calculated in situ, the most probable stress magnitude and orientation were predicted numerically. Accordingly, the major and minor horizontal principal stress component at Bakhtiari dam site were determined 5.7 and 2.1