Longwall mining is one of the most widely used underground mining methods most suitable in relatively flat-lying, thick, and uniform coalbeds. Due to extraction of the coal seam, the panel roof strata above the mined zone will be destressed and then the roof loads will be redistributed and transferred to the front abutment and neighboring solid sections with higher load bearing capacity where the adjacent access tunnels and the corresponding barrier pillars are located. The height of destressed zone (HDZ), in this paper is taken as equivalent to the combined height of the caving and fracturing zones above the mined panel roof induced due to longwall mining. The height of destressed zone plays a vital role in accurate determination of the amount of loads being transferred towards front abutment and panel sides. The paper describes the mechanism of development of the height of this zone. Finally, five new simple, yet conclusive, mathematical approaches to estimate the height of destressed zone are presented. The results of the methods proposed are compared with each other and with the comparable methods. The methods proposed are further compared and verified with in-situ measurements reported in the literatures. The comparative results confirm the agreement that exist among the methods and those with the in-situ measurements as well. Finally the methods have shown that, in short term, the height of destressed zone ranges from 6.5 to 24 times the extraction coal seam height; while, in long term, the height of destressed zone ranges from 11.5 to 46.5 times the extraction coal seam height. Therefore, beyond this height the overburden pressure will be transferred towards the front abutment, the adjacent access tunnels, the intervening barrier pillars as well as the panel rib-sides.Longwall mining is one of the most widely used methods in underground coal extraction. One of the most important advantages of this method is the automated form of underground coal mining characterized by high efficiency. The main objective of coal mining is to economically extract coal and safely remove them from the ground. Hence, the mining efficiency solely depends on the coal seams overall conditions. In this method, due to the extraction of coal seams within a considerable panel width, after advancing the hydraulic jacks or powered roof supports, the immediate roof of the mined panel is unsupported and hence is allowed to collapse and cave in some distance behind the hydraulic jacks or in the goaf area. The downward movement of the roof strata then gradually extends upwards and will cause the disturbed roof strata to become destressed. Thus, the overburden pressure above the destressed zone will be redirected towards the front abutment and the two adjacent neighboring solid sections where the gate roads (access tunnels serving the coal face), the intervening barrier pillar and the adjacent un-mined solid sections are located. The upward extension of destressed zone (HDZ) depends on a variety of parameters such as: depth, thickness of the extracted coal seams, panel width, the number and the relative thickness and the strength of the panel roof strata and the corresponding coefficient of expansion. Nowadays, the prime concerns of many coal mining researchers are to find the appropriate approaches to appraise the panel roof strata behavior during and after panel extraction. Professional mining engineers who are dealing with the longwall mining design need to effectively determine the height of destressed zone above the panel roof that induced due to longwall mining. The height of destressed zone (HDZ), in this paper, is considered to be equivalent to the combined height of the caving and the fracturing zones that exist above the mined panel roof. To suitably evaluate the amount of transferrable loads to the adjacent tunnels as well as the intervening barrier pillars, the height of destressed zone must be estimated accordingly which is the main objective of this paper. Longwall mining is a highly productive underground coal mining technique whose basic principles have been traced to the latter part of the 17th century to Shropshire and other counties in England (     According to    A surface subsidence and extensometer monitoring research program undertaken above longwall panels 4 and 5 at Clarence Colliery in Australia was reported by According to Apart from the above remarkable referred literatures, an interesting microseismic monitoring study was carried out at the Gordonstone or Kestrel Coal Mine, in Australia (  According to According to   In regards to the above referred views some existing empirical criteria that were used to estimate the height of caving/fracturing zone are also reviewed and presented in There are several approaches to determine the height of destressed zone above the mined panel roof in longwall mining; in-situ measurement, laboratory physical simulation, numerical modeling, and mathematical modeling. Although in-situ measurements provide helpful and reliable results, due to the inherent complexity of determining the height of the destressed zone using this approach, in particular for deep coal mining, actual implementation of this procedure might be considered cumbersome, lengthy, and costly. Laboratory physical simulation is not a popular approach owing to discordantly limitations for model construction length of time and cost required to execute the experiment. The last two remaining approaches, however, are the simplest, least costly and may yield very handy and reliable result as well. In this paper, the authors focus on the last method, that is, the mathematical approach so that with regards to mechanism of panel roof fracture initiation and their extents, two general models are proposed; Geometry-independent roof fracture and Geometry-dependent roof fracture both of which will be outlined henceforth. In this model, it is assumed that the width of destressed zone is equal to the extracted panel width. In other words, the tensile failure occurs at two extreme ends of the panel perpendicular to the advancing direction. On the basis of these assumptions the following two new sub-models are proposed. In this sub-model, it is assumed that all panel roof strata have equal thickness and the average volume expansion of broken caved in materials and fractured rocks is a coefficient of the extracted seam height ( In order to prove the convergence of Eq. It must be born in mind that in Eq. Hence, the limiting equation to be used for determining the height of destressed zone can be given in the following form: It is obvious that if expansion factors of the panel roof strata are known then Eq. In this model, it is assumed that an increase in volume of broken panel roof rock strata is a function of the free space in mined panel area. Hence, if the thickness of first roof stratum is equal to the extracted seam height then the height of broken layer will be increased by a factor of “α”, that is, the height of free space will be decreased accordingly ( Eq. By employing Eq. In this sub-model, it is assumed that the roof failure depends on the geometry of the panel roof situation and follows a vertical parabolic function as has been illustrated in Then, by employing the boundary conditions, that is, (0, H Taking the expansion factor of the broken materials into consideration and on this account cross-sectional area of the caved in rocks will be “α” times the area of the parabolic shape shown in By using Eq. In this model, it is assumed that the shape of destressed zone is similar to half a vertical ellipse as depicted in In this sum-model, it is assumed that the shape of destressed zone resembles to a triangle as depicted in By employing the Eq. In this section, comparative analyses of the results obtained from the five new approaches are given for estimation of the height of destressed zone (HDZ). The results are further compared with the only comparable formula given by Triangular, Parabolic, Elliptical, and Geometric models as well as Peng and Chiang's model illustrate a linear relation between HDZ and parameters such as; the expansion factor and the extracted coal seam height. Hence, in these models, the ratio of (H As it can be seen from Five new mathematical approaches were proposed to model the height of destressed zone based on the assumptions of being independent and/or dependent on the geometry of the mined panel roof rock strata. The results were analyzed and compared with both in-situ measurements and those proposed empirically by researchers, obtained from a comprehensive literature review. An average of 5% expansion factor has been taken to represent the long-term condition of the goaf materials as well as the roof fractured rocks. Beyond this height the overburden pressure will be transferred towards the front abutment, the adjacent access tunnels, the intervening barrier pillars and the panel rib-sides. Hence, no matter at what depth the longwall is located, the complete overburden pressure will not be inserted on the broken rocks located some distance behind the hydraulic jacks in the goaf area. In fact, the difference between the longwall depth and the critical height of destressed zone (HDZ) must be considered for the calculations of the stress transfer towards front abutment and the adjacent rib-sides. On this basis, the long-term results of the models are proven to be in a close agreement with the in-situ measurements and with those proposed empirically by researchers as shown in Acknowledgement is due to the School of Mining Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran for providing the sabbatical opportunity to the first author to complete this research work at the Department of Mining and Materials Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, Canada. The first author also acknowledges that this work could not be completed without research support provided by the