The extraction of copper from acidic leach solution with the aldoxime Acorga M5640 using a pulsed sieve plate column has been investigated. The pregnant leach solution was produced through pressure leaching of an industrial sphalerite concentrate that contained zinc, iron, copper, indium and other minor elements. Bench scale studies on solvent extraction have been carried out for selecting the composition of the organic phase and the pH of the leach solution to perform the separation of copper. An organic phase with 10% (v/v) Acorga M5640 and 2.5% (v/v) isotridecanol was chosen to test the hydrodynamic and mass transfer performance of the extraction column. The results of the pilot plant experiments demonstrated the feasibility of operating the extraction of copper from the aqueous solution using a pulsed sieve plate column.During the last three decades, hydrometallurgical processing is gaining more importance than pyrometallurgy owing to economic and environmental reasons. Moreover, hydrometallurgy is suitable to process lower grade ores, wastes such as slag, tailings and recycled solutions ( Further, solvent extraction presents one of the largest applications of hydrometallurgy in metal purification. The classical solvent extraction equipments used are mixer–settlers and different types of counter current extraction columns. On comparing the performance characteristics of these equipments, columns are found highly efficient and exhibit low costs in respect of stage numbers, solvent inventory, settler area, site area and maintenance ( The present study was focused on the extraction of copper from the solution obtained in the acidic ferric sulphate leaching of a sulphide zinc concentrate, whereas copper is present mainly as chalcopyrite. This zinc concentrate was produced by Somincor from the Portuguese Neves-Corvo ore. These studies were carried out within a project, which aims to develop a full flowsheet for the treatment of this particular sphalerite concentrate in order to recover zinc and other metals in some saleable form. Copper was the first metal to be separated from the pregnant leach solution by using solvent extraction. The dissolution of sulphide minerals in ferric sulphate media follows the general equation: Presently, a pulsed sieve plate column was chosen for the pilot plant tests. Pulsed sieve plate columns have been of interest in the field of liquid-liquid contacting because pulsing improves the rate of mass transfer by reducing the drop size ( There is a lack in the literature concerning the application of solvent extraction for copper processing from sulphide ores because of the difficulty of their leaching ( The solvent extraction reagents Acorga M5640 and ShellSol D70 (aliphatic diluent; aromatic content < The aqueous phase used in the column experiments was prepared with tap water and the chemicals were of commercial grade. The other aqueous solutions were prepared with deionised water and the chemicals were of AR grade. The pH of the aqueous solutions was adjusted by adding NaOH or H The solutions were analysed for metals concentration by AAS using a Perkin Elmer- AAnalyst 200 for the aqueous solutions, whereas the organic phases were analysed using the Spectrometer 1100 from Perkin Elmer. The concentration of minor elements (As, Bi, Sb, Sn) in the aqueous solutions was determined by the FIAS 100, Perkin Elmer. Ferrous ion was determined by volumetric analysis with potassium dichromate ( The samples of the sphalerite concentrate used in this study were produced from the Portuguese Neves-Corvo ore. The chemical composition of the concentrate, determined by chemical digestion using a microwave digestor (CEM 2000), is presented in This concentrate was examined by optical microscopy, electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) and X-ray diffraction (D8 Bruker AXS theta-2theta), which revealed that the main minerals are sphalerite (82.2%), pyrite (10.8%) and chalcopyrite (3.2%). The granulometric analysis of the concentrate was carried out by laser scattering using the granulometer Malvern Mastersizer 2000. This analysis showed that 99% of the particles have a diameter below 70 The metals solution used in part of the solvent extraction experiments was obtained through the pressure leaching of the zinc concentrate. In fact, the results obtained in atmospheric leaching tests of this concentrate revealed that, for high solid/liquid ratios, autoclave leaching under oxygen pressure should be considered to attain the complete dissolution of the interesting metals contained in the concentrate ( The leaching was carried out using a Hastelloy C-276 autoclave (Parr, model 4843). 1 The equilibrium experiments were carried out by contacting the specified volumes of aqueous and organic phases in separating funnels for 2 The kinetic experiments were carried out in a baffled double-wall thermostatic glass reactor of capacity 400 A pulsed sieve plate column was used to carry out the extraction experiments at continuous level. The arrangement of the column and auxiliary equipment is shown in After filling the column with the aqueous phase (continuous), the organic phase (dispersed) was introduced. When the steady-state conditions were reached, thirteen samples of the aqueous phase were collected from taps distributed along the column. The holdup of the dispersed phase was determined by withdrawing four samples of the dispersion along the column and also by measuring the global value. The latter was obtained by displacing the entire layer of solvent into a measuring cylinder after the inlet and outlet flows have been stopped simultaneously and the dispersion has been allowed to coalesce at the interface. The drop diameters were also measured at four different points along the column using the photographic method. The experiments were performed at room temperature, which was in the range of 25–30 Photographs were taken by a Nikon F90X camera attached to a Nikon PB-6 and to a micro Nikkor 60 The drop size was obtained by using the KS100 image analysis software (Kontron Elektronik GmbH) after the digitalization of the negatives (Epson FilmScan200). The densities of the aqueous and organic solutions were measured with a pycnometer, whereas the viscosity data were obtained with an Ubbelohde viscometer (Schott). Interfacial tension data were obtained with a Krüss tensiometer, model DSA10HS-Mk2. Some important aspects of copper extraction using the extractant Acorga M5640 were examined on laboratory scale before applying the system in the pilot plant. A few preliminary tests pointed out that the formulation of Acorga M5640 with isodecanol or isotridecanol favoured the stripping step and could be advantageous to the overall process of copper extraction. Therefore, isotridecanol, which is commonly used in industrial plants and shows a good performance in terms of phase separation, was chosen to modify Acorga M5640. For the laboratory scale studies two concentrations of Acorga M5640 (10 and 20% (v/v)) without and with isotridecanol, using the volume ratio extractant to isotridecanol 4:1 and 2:1, were investigated. These organic systems were contacted with a synthetic solution of 5 The primary contaminant in the zinc leach liquor that competes with Cu(II) for the aldoxime reagent is Fe(III). Since its concentration is significantly higher than that of copper, it becomes important to determine the corresponding co-extraction to evaluate the selectivity of the system. Several experiments were carried out to examine the separation of copper from the leach solution with the highest content of iron (leach solution B). The initial pH of the leach solution was varied in the range 1.0–1.5. Further, the selectivity of the separation process was examined near the loading conditions. The separation factor Cu/Fe was observed to be nearly constant (1.0–1.4 The effect of isotridecanol on the extraction rate of copper from leach liquor at pH 1.35 was also investigated previously. Accordingly to the results, which will be described elsewhere, in cases of 10% Acorga M5640 without and with 2.5% isotridecanol the extraction was very fast and the approach to equilibrium exceeded 99% in 60 The extraction isotherms using the selected organic phase and the leach solutions produced by pressure leaching, whose pH was adjusted to 1.35, were then drawn. Also, the equilibrium using the synthetic aqueous solutions with 1.2  The kinetics of extraction was also checked to compare the data obtained with synthetic and leach solution. The results are shown in The pulsed sieve plate column can operate in three different flow regimes, i.e. mixer–settler, dispersion and emulsion, which depends on the pulse velocity Our preliminary tests in the pulsed sieve plate column were carried out with the aqueous and organic flow rates of 19.8 In column, the flows and the dispersed phase holdup, where The slip velocity is related to the drop characteristic velocity, concept introduced by A linear plot through the origin between experimental values There are three different approaches to deal with the mass transfer in liquid–liquid extraction columns, i.e. the axial dispersion model ( The set of equations presented before, i.e. two differential equations (Eqs. In order to solve the model equations for the extraction of copper in the pulsed sieve plate column, it is necessary to estimate the values of the specific interfacial area and the axial mixing coefficients for continuous and dispersed phases. The specific interfacial area was calculated by the following expression: The dispersed phase holdup was obtained from the average of five experimental values (global value and four values along the column). The Sauter mean diameter of drops,   Regarding the axial mixing coefficients, the ones were estimated by empirical correlations. The axial coefficient for the dispersed phase was estimated from the correlation obtained by    A brief consideration about the relatively low values of the experimental In Eqs. In Eq.  Where the Reynolds and Schmidt numbers can be determined as follows: Analogously, the Schmidt number for dispersed phase is defined through the expression: In Eq.   It is worth noting that the fractional resistance was calculated at outlet organic conditions, which means that the distribution ratio was calculated by using The results listed in Finally, it is worthwhile to mention that the results obtained thus allowed to a better understanding of the performance of the pulsed sieve plate column and demonstrated the viability of operating the extraction of copper in this type of contactor. Further work is required to test the stripping step for the overall process of copper recovery by solvent extraction. The performance of a pulsed sieve plate column for the extraction of copper from acidic leach solution with Acorga M5640 was investigated. Before testing the system at pilot plant, bench scale studies on solvent extraction were carried out for selecting the composition of the solvent and the pH of the pregnant leach solution to achieve the selective separation of copper. The tests performed at pilot scale and continuous level allowed to a better understanding of the hydrodynamics of the pulsed sieve plate column, besides the process of mass transfer. The hydrodynamic experiments indicated that the Thornton equation can be used to correlate the holdup of the dispersed organic phase in the column with the present system. The mass transfer experiments revealed that copper could be efficiently extracted from feed solution with 1.2  pulse amplitude (m) concentration of solute drag coefficient (0.6) Sauter mean diameter (m) column diameter (m) diameter of drop i (m) hole diameter (m) pitch (m) diffusivity (m axial mixing coefficient for phase i (m continuous phase axial mixing coefficient at zero flow rate (m pulse frequency (Hz) gravity acceleration overall height of transfer unit based on the continuous phase (m) plate spacing (m) overall mass transfer coefficient based on the continuous phase (m/s) column length (m) distribution ratio, number of drops with diameter Peclet number volumetric flow rate (m Reynolds number cross-sectional column area (m Schmidt number Sherwood number superficial velocity of phase i (m/s) drop characteristic velocity (m/s) slip velocity (m/s) dispersed phase holdup fractional free area of the plate fractional resistance density difference viscosity (Pa density (kg/m interfacial tension (N/m) aqueous feed phase continuous phase calculated value dispersed phase equilibrium experimental value entry of column organic phase chemical reaction of extraction outlet of column Financial support of