The electronic structures of organic reducing agents used in the leaching of polymetallic nodules and related organic compounds were investigated by means of INDO and CNDO methods of quantum chemistry. It was found that among the electronic structure indices studied, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy of an organic compound correlated best with its reducing power. The HOMO energy of oxalic acid was recommended as the criteria for the selection of effective reducing agents for the acid leaching of polymetallic nodules.Polymetallic ocean nodules (also known as manganese nodules), sediments of ferromanganese oxides on ocean floors, contain abundant valuable metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt as well as manganese. They are deemed alternative sources of these metals with the gradual depletion of land-based deposits. The processing techniques of the nodules are quite specific. There are usually no separate mineral phases of nickel, copper and cobalt in the nodules. These metals are distributed in the manganese and iron oxide phases as solid solutions Manganese in the nodules is normally present in its tetravalent form, as δ-MnO Recently, In light of the advantages of the phenol type and aromatic amine type reducing agents, it is felt that a better understanding of the reducing properties of the organic compounds are needed. This is especially so when one realizes that unlike inorganic reducing agents, which can be chosen by the related half-cell reaction potentials, effective organic reducing agents are difficult to select because of the lack of electrochemical data. From a fundamental point of view, the reducing property of organic reducing agents originates from electronic structures of their molecules. It is of theoretical and practical significance to study their electronic structures, find the indices correlated to the reducing property, and build criteria for the selection of new organic reducing agents. In this communication, the electronic structures of a number of organic reducing agents and related organic compounds have been investigated by means of INDO and CNDO methods of quantum chemistry. Based on the results, a criterion has been set up to choose organic compounds as reducing agents in the acid leaching of polymetallic ocean nodules. The polymetallic ocean nodule samples, collected from the central Pacific Ocean basin, were air-dried, crushed and ground to 77% passing 74 μm. Chemical analysis indicated that the sample contained 21.09% Mn, 0.43% Cu, 0.65% Ni, 0.33% Co, 13.37% Fe, 1.54% TiO Leaching experiments were carried out under ambient temperature in a fume hood. A 20-g nodule sample was leached in 80 ml of solution containing 2.36 mol/l sulfuric acid and pre-determined amount of an organic reducing agent. The slurry was agitated in a 250-ml beaker with a magnetic stirrer for 20 min. Afterwards, the pulp was filtered, and the filter cake (leach residue) was washed, dried and sent for chemical analysis. The sulfuric acid, sodium sulfite and the organic reagents used were of chemical grade and were used directly without further purification. Calculation of the electronic structure indices of the organic compounds was carried out on a Pentium III 450 MHz desktop computer, using a software package Gaussian 98 W and GaussView 2.1. The package was purchased from Gaussain, Pittsburgh, USA. INDO and CNDO methods Lewis acid-base theory has been successfully applied to interpret organic reactions by organic chemists. They use the term “nucleophile” for a Lewis base, which donates electrons, and “electrophile” for a Lewis acid, which accepts electrons. It is known that in redox reactions, electron transfer occurs and the reducing agent can be considered a donor of electrons and the oxidizing agent an acceptor of electrons. The effect of substitution on the reactivity of aromatic rings towards electrophiles can be sketched as shown in It can be seen that amino-benzene (aniline), hydroxybenzene (phenol) and methylbenzene (toluene) are more reactive than benzene. On the other hand, –COOH and –NO (a) aniline>phenol>toluene>benzene; (b) (c) 1,2,3-trihydroxybenzene> (d) 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid>2,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid> (e) hydroxybenzene> (f) (g) 1,2,3-trihydroxybenzene>3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid. The reducing power of the aromatic compounds is determined by their electronic structures, which can be investigated with the theory of quantum chemistry. First, the semi-empirical INDO method was employed for this purpose. The structural parameters of atomic groups, such as –NH Electronic structure indices, including the energy of highest occupied molecular orbital (the HOMO), the energy of lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (the LUMO), gross orbital population, atomic Mulliken population, atomic charge, total Mulliken population on benzene ring, were analyzed. It was found that the energy of HOMO correlated best with the reducing power of the studied aromatic compounds. Therefore, only the HOMO and LUMO energies are listed in So far, we have established the correlation between HOMO energy and reducing power for aromatic compounds. In order to find the correlation between the HOMO energy and the reducing power of nonaromatic organic compounds, the electronic structures of other related organic compounds, such as cyclohexane, cyclohexylamine, cyclohexanol, methanol, oxalic acid, and ascorbic acid (vitamin C), were studied using the INDO method. In the meantime, the reducing effects of these aromatic and nonaromatic compounds on the sulfuric acid leaching of polymetallic nodules were tested under ambient temperature. The results are presented in As can be seen from The analysis of electronic structures of the representative organic compounds with CNDO method shows a similar rule (the same structure parameters as in INDO calculation were used). As illustrated in As seen from the preceding discussion, the reducing power of an organic compound correlates with its HOMO energy. As an effective organic reducing agent, its HOMO energy should be above a certain threshold to guarantee enough reducing power for the sulfuric acid leaching of polymetallic nodules at ambient temperature. It seems that the HOMO energy of oxalic acid can be taken as the threshold. INDO and CNDO calculations of the electronic structures of organic compounds indicated that the HOMO energy of an organic compound correlated well with its reducing power. When the HOMO energy was above a threshold value, which in this study was the HOMO energy of oxalic acid, an organic compound may be used as an effective reducing agent for the sulfuric acid leaching of polymetallic nodules. It will be interesting to see if the threshold value of HOMO energy set by oxalic acid in this study is still valid when more organic compounds are examined. Also, it will be significant to find out if such correlation also exists in other reduction leaching systems.