The continuous lumping approach was used for modeling of hydrocracking of heavy crude oil at moderate reaction conditions. The model parameters were estimated from experimental results obtained in an isothermal fixed bed reactor at different temperatures (380–420°C) and space velocity (1.5, 0.5 and 0.33h−1) at constant pressure and hydrogen-to-oil ratio of 9.8MPa and 5000ft3/bbl respectively. Four model parameters showed linear trend with temperature whereas only one parameter remained almost constant. The optimized values of model parameters were employed to predict results obtained at different reaction conditions from which they were derived. Comparisons between experimental data and predictions using the continuous lumping kinetic model showed good agreement with average absolute error lower than 5%.Hydrocracking is one of the most attractive process alternatives to produce intermediate distillates from heavy crude oils and residua. Historically, hydrocracking has been a much demanded process in petroleum refining industry, but recently it has increased its importance due to the need to process heavy petroleum fractions To understand more about hydrocracking of unconventional crude oils in order to perform preliminary process design, information about the effect of reaction conditions on selectivity and conversion, and type of feedstock is mandatory. This information can be obtained either from experiments or by simulation. Experiments, of course, are highly desired but they are costly and time consuming. Simulations, on the other hand, are usually very cheap and rapid to conduct. However, modeling hydrocracking of heavy oils is not an easy task, since it requires detailed characterization of feed and products, which, in contrast to other lighter petroleum streams, is much more complex to perform due to the huge amount of heavy hydrocarbons present in its composition. During the simulation of hydrocracking reactor an accurate kinetic model must be employed. There are different approaches for modeling hydrocracking kinetics which have been recently reviewed by Ancheyta et al. Modeling kinetics of those reactions occurring during hydrocracking of petroleum feedstocks has been traditionally studied by discrete approximation, specifically by lumping compounds of feed and products into a few cuts frequently characterized by ranges of normal boiling points (e.g. naphtha, middle distillates, residue, etc.), which undergo different series and parallel reactions Other approaches have been proposed such as the consideration of hydrocracking reactions to be analogous to axial dispersion Another method considers petroleum as a mixture containing an infinite number of components, which can be represented as continuous mixture instead of discrete mixture. Such a mixture can be described further by distribution concentration function Different aspects of the theory of continuous lumping and its application for reactions after the pioneering work of Aris and Gavalas Laxminarasimhan et al. Based on Laxminarasimhan's work, Khorasheh et al. and Ashuri et al. To use the model of Laxminarasimhan et al. The main objective of the present investigation is to apply the continuous kinetic lumping model to describe hydrocracking of heavy crude oil carried out at moderate reaction conditions. The model was formulated in terms of dimensionless temperature ( Because true boiling point distillation curve is a monotonic function of reactivity ( Terms By using Eq. Eq. Eq. In this work the dimensionless temperature was split into 150 divisions in order to obtain the desirable accuracy Adaptive Lobatto quadrature was used to calculate the integral of the right hand side of Eq. In order to obtain the initial concentration, Eq. A computer program was coded in Matlab, and to determine the optimal values of the five model parameters, the algorithm of Levenverg-Marquardt The developed Matlab program was first validated with the data reported by Bennett and Bourne Experimental data were obtained from a bench scale plant equipped with an isothermal fixed bed reactor. Detailed descriptions of the experimental setup and procedure were given elsewhere Maya crude oil was employed as feedstock for all experiments in order to produce different hydrotreated oils. A commercial NiMo supported on  It is anticipated from the results shown in The effect of temperature on distillation curves is reported in The experimental data of distillation curves of hydrocracked products obtained at the lowest LHSV (0.33 It is evident from Once the parameters of the continuous kinetic model were properly estimated, it was applied to predict the distillation curves of hydrocracked products obtained at space velocities other than 0.33 An analysis of residuals was also carried out and the results are depicted in The continuous kinetic lumping model, in contrast to the discrete lump model, is able to predict the whole distillation curve of hydrocracked product. For instance, A parity plot comparison between prediction with the continuous lumping model applied for 9 lumps, and the experimental values at different temperature and LHSV is presented in The main advantage of the continuous kinetic model is that prediction of product composition can be performed with different boiling point ranges, for instance The continuous kinetic lumping model was successfully applied for moderate hydrocracking of heavy oil. The model parameters were accurately correlated with reaction temperature. The predicted product composition obtained with the continuous kinetic lumping model showed a maximum error of 5% compared with experimental data. The authors thank Instituto Mexicano del Petróleo for its financial support. I.E. and M.A.R. also thank CONACyT for financial support.