Prior to field scale research, soil samples are analysed on a laboratory scale for electrical resistivity calibrations. Currently, there are a variety of field instruments to estimate the water content in soils using different physical phenomena. These instruments can be used to develop moisture-resistivity relationships on the same soil samples. This assures that measurements are performed on the same material and under the same conditions (e.g., humidity and temperature). A geometric factor is applied to the location of electrodes, in order to calculate the apparent electrical resistivity of the laboratory test cells. This geometric factor can be determined in three different ways: by means of the use of an analytical approximation, laboratory trials (experimental approximation), or by the analysis of a numerical model. The first case, the analytical approximation, is not appropriate for complex cells or arrays. And both, the experimental and numerical approximation can lead to inaccurate results. Therefore, we propose a novel approach to obtain a compromise solution between both techniques, providing a more precise determination of the geometrical factor.The determination of soils' moisture is conventionally done by a combination of laboratory and field measurements, where the parameters determined in the laboratory are extrapolated in the field (e.g. Ideally, to determine a reliable correlation of the two physical properties, laboratory measurements (resistivity and water content) should be performed on the same sample at the same time, minimizing any possible loss of accuracy. The presence of sensors in the samples affects the resistivity value calculated after modifying the electrical fields. Thus, it is necessary to ensure that this effect is negligible or minimized. Soil resistivity measurements are carried out on specimens which have been prepared or gathered as undisturbed samples, generally with cylindrical shapes. For this purpose, two techniques are normally used. The first is commonly known as the two electrode method, the main disadvantage of which is that it is not possible to separate the resistance of the sample from the contact resistance of the electrodes. The electrodes introduce an undesired noise which affects the results in a negative way. However, some authors have noted the advantages of this method when using low-frequency alternating currents, such as reducing electrode polarization phenomenon, electrode contact resistance, and disturbance caused by voltage electrodes ( The second technique (the four-electrode method) applies principles similar to those used in common field arrays ( In this equation, K [m] represents a geometric factor depending on the position of the different electrodes. It is important to emphasize that in this operation method, the potential is measured between two electrodes through which no current is flowing. Current electrodes can be replaced by non-polarizable electrodes or by metallic electrodes introduced into the solution. This makes the resistance associated with the sample/electrode contact negligible when it has approximately the same ionic concentration as the fluid filling the pores of the sample. This technique was tested, for example, by In addition to cylindrical cells, rectangular parallelepiped moulds are also used ( A widely used array in laboratory DC-resistivity measurements is known as the “circular four-point electrode cell” ( Using conventional electrical tomography instrumentation,    In laboratory studies (   In addition to the effect triggered by the measuring electrodes, the presence of foreign elements in the soil samples, both resistive and conductive, can have a significant impact on the observed resistivity, as shown for example in the studies on the presence of metallic reinforcing bars in concrete samples ( Usually, the resistivity of circular cells is established by carrying out calibrations with known resistivity solutions, from which the geometric factor is estimated by means of a regression analysis. Thus, There are many devices and cells to determine the resistivity in the lab, and undoubtedly, there new ones will appear in the future. In some cases, an analytical approximation can be valid, but when the design of the measurement cell or device is more complex, experimental approximations in a lab or a numerical approximation by means of the finite element method are necessary. This study features two objectives: 1) to determine the effects on the resistivity measures of non-natural elements (i. e. humidity sensors) inserted into the cells and 2) to determine a reliable value for the geometric constant of a cell in laboratory electric testing. Different types of cells, which are shown in In general terms, the sensors embedded in the samples consisted of conductive elements, such as rods and perforated metal sleeves, plastic insulation elements, and sensitive elements (sand and ceramic) whose resistivity is modified at the same time as the soil sample. The Watermark 200SS ( If two porous ceramic disks (solid matrix) are used instead of a granular matrix, the MPS-2 ( The WCR ( The speed at which the signal propagates through a given medium depends on its permittivity, and as the permittivity of the water (≈ In the four-electrode method, it is not only the volume of material found between the electrodes that affects the measurement. In addition, the electrical potential decreases as the distance between the source and the determination point increases. Therefore, not all elements in a given volume have a similar effect. To ensure that the aforementioned sensors, electrodes, and symmetry of the soil sample and the measuring device do not have a significant influence on the calculated resistivity value for a given cell, the impact of these elements on the measurements needs to be studied. Should it exist, it would be necessary to check that it does not vary with the resistivity of the sample in a significant way. The parameter describing the effect caused by the local changes of the resistivity in the potential measured at a given spot with a given device is called sensitivity (S). S is also addressed as the Fréchet derivative or Jacobian matrix and sometimes is expressed involving the apparent resistivity or its logarithm (∂ Sensitivity has been commonly used in 1D and 2D studies to analyze the depth of penetration of arrays, to compare the ability to solve any given anomaly between different arrays or to design more efficient devices (  To define the sensitivity of an elementary volume within a medium,  According to The sensitivity sections, as the one shown in This expression allows for the assessment of the contribution of each of the different elements not belonging to the soil samples and provides a quantitative measure of their effect on the measurements.  The calculations have been carried out on the understanding that both the current sources and the potential electrodes are point electrodes, except in the case of the cell model shown in The results ( The first step for determining K was to measure the resistance in the cells. In order to do this, the cell had to be sealed to make it watertight. It was then filled by means of a graded test tube so as to ascertain the exact amount of liquid used in the process. In the trials, different resistivity solutions from a broad range of values, from 0.5 and up to more than 1000 Once the conductivity of the solution filling the cell was determined, the different sensors were introduced in the cells and for each one, the resistance was determined (ΔV During the measurement of the resistance of the cell containing the WCR with the 12 The lab trials were numerically modelled by means of software based on the finite element method (COMSOL Multiphysics). With this modelling scheme, the conditions under which the measurements were carried out were simulated. These numerical simulations resolve only the theoretical values. That is, these synthetic results do not include the variations caused by the accuracy and resolution of the measuring instruments, errors in the dimensions, and sizes of elements such as electrodes and cells. Recently, Some authors, such as The physical parameters of the models, which are required to calculate the potentials, include the conductivity of the sample, the current intensity and the dielectric permittivity of the medium. As mentioned above, these latter values were calculated from those supplied by the WCR. For this purpose, a linear regression of the data measured in the lab tests was carried out ( To model the Watermark sensor, the conductivity of the sensitive element formed by loose elements with the appearance of fine sand was calculated using Archie's law ( An appropriate porosity value for a material with these characteristics would be approximately 30% ( The sensitive element of the MPS-2 consists of two porous ceramic disks with an attributed porosity of 18% and values for constants To estimate the permittivity of these elements, the expression for a dielectric mix of two components was used ( In the simple case of cylindrical soil samples as the one shown in Eq. From the lab measurements, the results of the theoretical models and the analysis of At this point, because of the three different values obtained for K, it is advisable to select the most appropriate value as the geometric constant for this cell. In other words, which value of K will take precedence if no analytical solution is available, or whether it would be more appropriate to obtain some kind of average or weighted mean of the three values of K. To resolve this important issue, the data are analysed assessing their concordance by means of the graphic difference method proposed by Altman and Bland ( To study the concordance of two different methods that measure the same parameter, these authors proposed the analysis of the differences in the measurements compared to their mean value ( In the absence of systematic errors in the measurements and with a normal distribution in the differences, the data are randomly distributed on both sides of the line corresponding to zero difference, with the mean of the calculated values indicating the systematic error of the second measurement method with respect to the first. When the differences between both measuring methods do not show a normal distribution, a logarithmic transformation or a percentage difference regarding the mean values depending on the measuring range is calculated ( If a wrong value for the geometric factor is used, we can add a correction coefficient to all of the calculated resistivity values which displaces the measurements by a certain amount. Therefore, to establish the most appropriate value for the geometric constant, the systematic error introduced in the resistivity values after applying the K obtained from the lab trials and the modelling through the finite element method is analysed. This analysis is executed by means of a graphic method based on a double empirical accumulative distribution ( To obtain the graph, referred to as the “mountain plot” by The percentage difference used in the calculation of the graph for a real reference resistivity value ( Replacing Using these expressions and the Krouwer-Monti graphs, it is possible to obtain a value of K which does not show systematic errors from the measurements obtained with the conductivity meter. These values of K correspond to real values and are not affected by the presence of foreign objects, geometry of the sample, or other factors. For this purpose, the following expression can be used ( The most appropriate value of K can also be calculated using only the value obtained by means of the theoretical calculation and comparing it with other lab measurements carried out with the cell without the presence of any sensor. In this case, K is determined by the following expression: To sum up, the proposed technique used to calculate the geometric constant of a cell with the identified pre-conditions consists of the following steps: Measurement of the resistance (ΔV/I) in the lab of a large range of resistivities on a cell of the same dimensions and using the same components (electrodes, sensors, etc.) which are used for the measurements of the soil samples. The resistance values should be corrected to a temperature reference value (generally, 25°). Calculation of resistivity values tested in the lab using resistance models. Determination of the K Representation of the differences between the resistivity values obtained as the inverse value of the conductivity (measured with the lab conductivimeter) and those calculated with the values of K estimated in the previous step compared to the average resistivity ( In the event that there is an absence of normality in the observed data, they would need to be transformed ( Representation of the Krouwer-Monti graphs and determination of the percentage resistivity differences for the 50% percentiles (d Calculation of the value of the K geometric constant by means of The results obtained following the above mentioned procedure are shown in Taking the calculated geometric factors ( Frequently, the verification of the geometric constant of the cells used for measuring soil resistivity in the laboratory is executed by means of a simple regression analysis or through the comparison with any substance working with a known conductivity pattern. Because the precision of a measurement does not guarantee its validity, in which validity is understood as the degree of the actual measurement of any phenomenon, a correct determination of the geometric constant of the cells is always desirable. This study proposed a calculation technique consisting of the combined application of laboratory measurements and their modelling (simulation using finite elements scheme), which can be used even in the presence of resistive and conductive elements not belonging to the soil sample. In the calibration studies where electric resistivity and gravimetric moisture content of soil, for example, are related to the matric potential and the permittivity, field sensors can be efficiently used without losing validity of the measurements. A valid resistivity measurement is achieved in these special cases from a concordance analysis between measurement methods, folded empirical cumulative distribution plot, and systematic error introduced when applying an inappropriate value of the geometrical factor for calculating resistivity. A resolution of the direct problem has been applied in the design and preparation of laboratory tests and has allowed us to modify conventional cells in order to adapt them for using different sensors. In this way, it is possible to predict which distribution will be more effective and to prove through the sensitivity study of the cell that a given setup reduces the influence on the measurements of the elements not belonging to the sample to negligible levels.