Introduction
                  Some studies have reported that fracture pattern was associated with reduction loss after surgery. The purpose of this study was to evaluate various factors that can influence reduction loss, including fracture patterns in unicondylar and bicondylar tibial plateau fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A total of 138 tibial plateau fractures that underwent open reduction and internal fixation using plates were retrospectively reviewed. The OTA/AO classification, fracture pattern, degree of comminution, and existence of reduction loss were evaluated based on simple radiographs and computed tomography. Patient information, including age, gender, and occupation, were acquired through chart reviews. The effect of each variable on reduction loss was evaluated through multiple logistic regression analysis.
               
                  Results
                  Of 138 knees, reduction loss was observed in 40 knees (29.0%). Reduction loss was found in 11 (20.4%) of the type B knees (54 knees) and 29 (34.5%) of the type C knees (84 knees), according to the OTA/AO classification. The multiple logistic regression analysis for all cases revealed that the existence of comminution and coronal fracture influenced the occurrence of reduction loss, with odds ratios of 9.148 and 4.823, respectively (P
                     <0.001 and P
                     =0.001, respectively). In type B and type C, according to the OTA/AO classification, the existence of comminution and coronal fracture had causal relationships with the occurrence of reduction loss. The odds ratios of comminution and coronal fracture for reduction loss for type B were 9.114 and 9.117, respectively (P
                     =0.019 and P
                     =0.031, respectively), and the odds ratios for type C were 8.490 and 4.782, respectively (P
                     =0.001 and 0.009, respectively).
               
                  Conclusions
                  When a tibial plateau fracture has a coronal fracture, if it is difficult to fix its fragments rigidly with medial or lateral plate fixation; therefore, buttress plating or direct fixation of fragments through the posteromedial, posterolateral, or posterior approach should be considered.Some studies have reported the clinical results of operative management for tibial plateau fracture Some studies have reported that fracture pattern was also associated with reduction loss after surgery. In a study of factors related to reduction loss in bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, Weaver et al. Research about the correlation between fracture pattern and reduction loss is clinically important because the approach or fixation method can vary, depending on the fracture pattern. However, in the aforementioned studies, the research subject was limited to posteromedial fragments in bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Posterolateral coronal fractures can occur in bicondylar fractures, and posteromedial or posterolateral fractures can also occur in unicondylar fractures. Although, Weaver et al. The purpose of this study was to evaluate various factors that can influence reduction loss, including fracture patterns in unicondylar and bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. This study was approved by the institutional review board at our institution (15-0157). Between January 2006 and June 2014, 190 patients (198 knees) at our institution underwent surgical treatment of tibial plateau fractures. The following inclusion criteria were applied: (1) patients who received open reduction and internal fixation using plates, (2) patients who were followed for one year or longer after surgery, (3) patients who underwent preoperative CT (computed tomography), and (4) patients whose follow-up weight bearing knee anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs were available. The following exclusion criteria were applied: (1) patients who had no available preoperative CT, (2) patients with a history of postoperative infection, (3) patients who could not perform weight bearing even after undergoing surgery due to a traumatic spine or brain injury, and (4) patients who underwent amputation due to a severe crushing injury ( The surgeries were performed by three experienced surgeons who specialized in knee surgery or trauma. Every surgery was performed after the soft tissues were stabilized. For patients who also had severe soft tissue injuries, such as tense swelling, fracture blisters or open wounds, a temporary external fixator was applied to maintain the length and alignment. After recovery of the soft tissue injury, definite plate fixation was performed. The plates were applied as unilateral or dual plates, depending on the fracture type and soft tissue condition. In the case of unilateral plate fixation, the plates were applied using the anterolateral or anteromedial approach. Dual plate fixation was conducted through separate anterolateral and medial skin incisions, and the plates were applied to the anterolateral and medial/anteromedial parts of the proximal tibia, respectively. During reduction, an external fixator or a universal distractor was used, and the joint line was checked through the arthroscopy or submeniscal approach. All plates applied to the lateral side of tibia were locking plates. For weight bearing, partial weight bearing was allowed from the second postoperative month. The OTA/AO classification Coronal fracture was defined as a facture in which the major fracture line of the medial or lateral tibial plateau was within −45° to 30° relative to the posterior femoral condylar axis ( The patient age at the time of surgery, gender, follow-up period, and occupation were obtained through chart reviews. Occupations were classified into a group of high labour intensive occupations, such as workers, athletes, and farmers, and a group of low labour intensive occupations, such as students, office workers, and housewives. The reliability of the alignment of articular surface to the articular surface depression, condylar widening and the axis of tibia were evaluated with the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC), whereas the reliability of the evaluation of the fracture classification and comminution was indicated by the kappa value. The ICCs of intra-observer reliability were >0.90, and the ICCs of inter-observer reliability were >0.80 for all measurements. The kappa values were >0.85 for all measurements. For the statistical analysis, SPSS version 22.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) was used. The significance level was set at The analysis was performed according to the OTA/AO classification (types B and C). In the multiple logistic regression analysis for type B, age, gender, occupation, comminution and coronal fracture were used as variables; in the analysis for type C, the fixation method (unilateral plating or dual plating) was added to the variables used in type B. The Of 138 knees, reduction loss was observed in 40 knees (29.0%). Reduction loss was found in 11 (20.4%) of the type B fractures (54 knees), according to the OTA/AO classification, and in 29 (34.5%) of the type C fractures (84 knees). In the type C fractures, reduction loss was observed in 13 knees (30.2%) in the unilateral plating group (43 knees) and in 16 knees (48.5%) in the dual plating group (33 knees). Coronal fractures existed in 43 knees (31.2%): 10 (18.5%) type B fractures and 33 (39.3%) type C fractures, according to the OTA/AO classification. The multiple logistic regression analysis of all cases revealed that the existence of comminution and coronal fracture affected the occurrence of reduction loss, with odds ratios of 9.148 and 4.823, respectively ( The analysis of type B and type C OTA/AO classifications also revealed that the existence of comminution and coronal fracture had a causal relationship with the occurrence of reduction loss ( This study had the following important findings. Reduction loss was observed in 29.0% of tibial plateau fractures after internal fixation using plate. In types B and C of the OTA/AO classification, reduction loss was observed in 20.4% and 34.5% of fractures, respectively. The multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that the existence of comminution and coronal fracture influenced the postoperative reduction loss. Both comminution and fracture pattern are important factors in the fracture surgeries. In particular, fracture pattern is a key factor when surgeons decide on the approach and fixation method. A detailed analysis of the preoperative fracture pattern is essential for obtaining accurate reduction and good clinical results. Comminution is widely accepted as a bad predictor for most joint fractures. Therefore, the descriptions in this paper will focus on fracture pattern. Several authors have studied posteromedial fragments in tibial plateau fractures Another possible reason for the high rate of reduction loss is associated with the position of the plate fixation. In the tibial plateau fractures included in this study, the plate was located at the anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia for lateral condyle fractures and at the medial or anteromedial aspect for medial condyle fractures. Thus, no plate was located at the posterior, posteromedial or posterolateral aspect. Such plate locations can be regarded as possible causes of the high rate of reduction loss because the screw cannot rigidly fix the posteromedial or posterolateral coronal fracture fragments. The clinical results of coronal fractures in unicondylar tibial plateau fractures have not been addressed to date. According to the results of this study, the incidence of coronal fracture is 18.5% in unicondylar fractures, which is lower than that in bicondylar fractures (39.3%). However, as with bicondylar fracture, coronal fracture was found to be an important cause of reduction loss. Particularly in the case of posterolateral coronal fracture, reduction loss appears to occur because reduction and fixation are not easy due to obstacles, such as the fibula and common peroneal nerve, and the screw cannot rigidly fix the fragments during anterolateral plating. Although the proximal articular surface of the tibia is relatively resistant to posttraumatic arthrosis This study has some limitations. First, the follow-up period is short. However, the purpose of this study was not to investigate the clinical results but to evaluate the reduction loss. Thus, the minimum follow-up period of one year seems to be sufficient to support the study results. Second, the effect of bone quality on reduction loss was not evaluated. It was difficult to evaluate bone mineral density for all patients. Third, the correlation between coronal fracture and reduction loss could not be evaluated according to the site by dividing the subjects into medial coronal fracture and lateral coronal fracture groups due to the small number of cases. Finally, reduction loss was evaluated through simple radiographs in this study. CT is required to more accurately evaluate the existence of reduction loss, but it was impossible to perform follow-up CT for all patients. When a tibial plateau fracture has a coronal fracture, if it is difficult to fix its fragments rigidly with medial or lateral plate fixation; therefore, buttress plating or direct fixation of fragments through the posteromedial, posterolateral, or posterior approach should be considered. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.