Transient gene expression in mammalian cells is intensively used for the rapid generation of recombinant proteins for biochemical, biophysical and pre-clinical studies. Still, the principles behind DNA transfer to the cells and the cellular cascade of events that ultimately dictate protein expression levels are not fully understood. Using polyethylenimine (PEI) mediated transfection of HEK293-EBNA1 cells, we sought to determine the most critical parameters that drive and limit recombinant protein production. Our results showed that a maximum of 65,000 plasmid copies/cell can be recovered in total extracts at 1 day post-transfection. Analyses performed after cell sorting revealed equal amounts of plasmid DNA in GFP-positive and -negative populations. However, nuclear plasmid content was three-fold higher in GFP-positive cells (1850 copies) than in GFP-negative cells (550 copies). The fact that significant amounts of plasmid DNA are found in the nucleus of GFP-negative cells suggests that its transcriptional competency is impaired. Interestingly, transfecting cells using a wide range of plasmid quantities at the optimal DNA:PEI ratio did not significantly affect the number of expressing cells. Thus, it appears that successful transgene expression is more likely to depend on a cellular “competent” state than to the quantity of plasmid DNA delivered per cell. Moreover, Northern blot analysis and SEAP/GFP measurement following plasmid titration experiments showed that transcriptional and translational processes are operating near to saturation under optimal transfection conditions. Overall, our results suggest that events that regulate nuclear translocation of plasmid DNA and its transcriptional competency as well as translational/post-translational limitations represent major bottlenecks in the success of a PEI-mediated protein production.Delivery of exogenous DNA in animal cells is a widely used process in biological sciences for the expression of functional recombinant proteins (r-proteins). The technique usually involves the use of plasmid DNA, either alone (electroporation) or complexed with natural or synthetic carrier molecules such as cationic lipids or polymers ( Polyethylenimines (PEIs) are cationic polymers widely used in the industry for over 30 years in various applications, such as water purification, mineral extraction, shampoo formulation, etc. PEI was first reported as an efficient transfection reagent by PEI efficiently condenses DNA and it is well acknowledged that PEI/DNA complexes (polyplexes) are taken up by the cell via interactions with heparan sulphate proteoglycans expressed at the cell surface ( For large-scale applications, increasing both the number of cells expressing the transgene (i.e. transfection efficiency) and cell's specific productivity are direct ways to increase volumetric protein production. Most studies on PEI-mediated transfection are focused on designing better The 25 The human embryonic kidney 293 cell line stably expressing EBNA1 (293E) was maintained as a suspension culture in low-calcium HSFM supplemented with 1% bovine calf serum (BCS), 50 Cells (1 Cells were transfected with the pTT/hCD4-GFP plasmid and the cells expressing the fusion protein were magnetically isolated using the MACSelect system (Miltenyi Biotec, Gladbach, Germany). Briefly, the transfected cells (1 Determination of SEAP activity was performed essentially as previously described ( For Northern analyses, total RNA extractions, electrophoretic separation, transfer and probing were performed essentially as described by the manufacturers. Briefly, total RNA was extracted using Trizol (Invitrogen) and quantified by spectrophotometry. Twenty micrograms of total RNA were resolved on a formaldehyde/agarose gel and transferred on a positively charged nylon membrane (Roche, Laval, QC). For Southern analyses, DNA was extracted from whole cells or nuclear preparations using DNAzol (Invitrogen) as described by the manufacturer. After isolation, DNA was treated with RNAse A (Sigma–Aldrich) (10 We first directed our efforts in determining the fate and distribution of the plasmid DNA after its addition to the cells. A plasmid uptake kinetic study was performed by harvesting pTT/GFP transfected cells at different time points and analyzing their total plasmid content by Southern blotting ( To better quantify the amount of plasmid DNA taken up by expressing and non-expressing cells, transfections were carried out with the pTT/hCD4-GFP plasmid and cells were magnetically sorted in CD4-GFP positive and negative populations 48 To identify and better understand the cellular limitations to protein overexpression, we evaluated the impact of gene dosage on protein production. Our preliminary results showed that the best approach to reliably deliver different amounts of plasmid per cell was to use stuffer DNA to replace part of the coding plasmid as compared to using different amounts of PEI:DNA complexes (data not shown). To level the differences in the final yields obtained between independent experiments, mainly caused by variations in transfection efficiencies, the results were normalized as relative values to the optimal transfection condition (being 100% of coding plasmid) obtained in each individual experiment. When performing titration experiments with the pTT/SEAP and pTT/GFP vectors, protein expression was not found to be linearly correlated with the amount of plasmid added to the cells ( In an attempt to better characterize the apparent saturation observed in Peptone feeding has recently been reported to significantly increase the expression of r-protein upon PEI-mediated transient gene expression ( Since no apparent plateau could be reached for mRNA synthesis when increasing the amount of coding plasmid in the transfection mixture (see When using large-scale transfection of mammalian cells for the production of r-proteins, the final yield will not only depend on transfection efficiency, but also on the use of an appropriate gene expression cassette, the number of transcriptionally competent plasmid copies delivered to the nucleus and the use of an optimized nutrient source, the latter promoting cell growth and bringing sufficient precursors and energy sources for mRNA and protein synthesis. This study was undertaken to determine potential bottlenecks that could limit r-protein production following PEI-mediated gene transfer in 293E cells. More specifically, we looked at plasmid DNA uptake, mRNA synthesis and protein production following transfection with increasing levels of pTT plasmid encoding SEAP or GFP reporter proteins. We first showed that from the total amount of plasmid DNA added for transfection, almost half could be recovered with the cellular fraction at 48 We performed DNA titration experiments and found that the same amount of expressing cells could be obtained over a 50-fold range of pTT/GFP vector in the transfection mixture. However, the expression levels did not correlate linearly to plasmid DNA amounts as SEAP and GFP expression reached ∼70% and 50% of maximal levels, respectively, with only 10% of pTT plasmid in the transfection mixture. Those experiments were performed by diluting the pTT plasmid in stuffer DNA to keep DNA and PEI amounts constant for all transfections. Attempts to vary the amount of polyplexes added to the cells in titration experiments resulted in very poor transfection efficiencies and protein yields at low polyplex concentrations (data not shown). This is in agreement with a recent work by The hyperbolic-like relation between gene dosage and protein expression obtained with both reporter proteins suggests saturation(s) in the cellular processes leading to protein expression. We thus looked at transcription efficiency by analyzing the SEAP mRNA content of cells transfected with increasing pTT/SEAP plasmid titers. The dose–response curve showed a ‘biphasic’ mRNA accumulation rate, having a break point at around 10% of the optimal plasmid content, as also observed with SEAP protein accumulation. This suggests that protein production could be limited in part by a transcriptional overload when using more than 10% of plasmid. Still, mRNA accumulation did not show complete saturation, as it steadily increased between 10% and 100% of pTT/SEAP plasmid. When looking at the relationship between SEAP expression and SEAP mRNA levels, the results suggest that translational/post-translational limitations also occur at higher mRNA levels. Adding more polyplexes to the cells increased cell-specific SEAP mRNA by up to 50% although protein production decreased. This again suggests that the translational/post-translational processes might saturate before transcription does when using standard plasmid copy amount. The observed reduction in SEAP production when adding more polyplexes could arise from the observed cytostatic effect (this study) or their toxicity as reported by others ( The hypothesis of translational limitation is reinforced by the fact that the addition of peptones 24 The high levels of secreted protein expression, driven by virus-derived promoters, could also have a substantial effect of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) integrity and subsequently, on protein expression levels. Indeed, two known mechanisms are involved in protein synthesis repression upon ER challenge, namely the unfolded protein response (UPR) and the ER overload response (EOR). Those mechanisms work toward restoring ER integrity and, upon failure, they can lead to cell death ( In light of these results, we conclude that nuclear translocation is an inefficient process, as up to 48% of added plasmids were found associated with total cell extracts after the first day of the transfection, while only 1–2% are found later in the nuclear fraction at 48 We would like to thank Lucie Bourget and Eric Massicotte for their support and insightful comments on flow cytometry analyses.