As an air bubble approaches a gold surface, a thin liquid film (TLF) is formed in between. The excess pressure (p) of the liquid in the film determines the rate of film thinning, which is of critical importance in flotation. In the present work, we have measured the kinetics of film thinning using a modified thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique by monitoring the interference patterns using a high speed camera. The results were analyzed using the Reynolds lubrication theory. It has been found that initially a TLF thins by the curvature pressure (p
                     cur) created due to the bubble deformation and subsequently by the disjoining pressure (Π) created by the surface forces in a wetting film. The results show that Π>0 on a hydrophilic surface and Π<0 on a surface hydrophobized by xanthate. Thus, the role of xanthate in flotation is to create the hydrophobic force that can overcome the repulsive force present in wetting films. It has been found also that the use of small bubbles is more effective for increasing the kinetics of film thinning and hence flotation rate.In flotation, bubbles and particles collide with each other before hydrophobic particles are selectively collected on the surface of air bubbles. During the initial stages of collision, a bubble deforms and produces a thin liquid film (TLF) between the bubble and particle, which is referred to as wetting film. The curvature change associated with the deformation creates a capillary pressure and hence causes the film to drain. As the film thins due to drainage to a thickness below ~ Many investigators studied the mechanisms by which wetting films become unstable when mineral particles are hydrophobized by collector coating. It has been suggested that the films are destabilized by the negative disjoining pressure (Π) ( Disjoining pressure is defined as the change in excess Gibbs free energy per unit area of a flat TLF ( At higher contact angles, Eq. In flotation, both Π The Derjaguin approximation ( While the electrical double-layer and van der Waals forces are well understood, there is no consensus on the origin of the hydrophobic force. Thus, one can determine Π As is well known, hydrocarbon chains of collector molecules associate with each other to form self-assembled monolayers or hemi-micelles ( In the present work, we have measured the negative disjoining pressures (Π Gold-coated glass plates (CA134, EMF) were used as substrates for wetting films. They were cleaned in a piranha solution (7:3 by volume of H A gold plate obtained in the manner described above was rendered hydrophobic by immersing it in a 10 Both the xanthate-treated and untreated gold plates were used as substrates for wetting films of water. The kinetics of film thinning was monitored using the modified thin film pressure balance (TFPB) technique ( Initially, the excess water in the film holder was removed by means of a piston pump until the Newton ring was appeared on the camera screen. The film was then allowed to thin spontaneously, while recording the interference patterns as a function of time. The interference fringes behaved perfectly in axial-symmetric manner; therefore, we analyzed the data in cylindrical coordinates. All the images were smooth and showed no irregularities. The spatial and temporal profiles of the wetting films were obtained by analyzing the changes in gray levels of the interference patterns using the Scheludko's method ( Film thinning experiments were conducted using both small and large films of radii (   The liquid in a wetting film thins when the pressure of the liquid in the film is higher than that in the far field. A normal stress balance across a horizontal wetting film gives the following relation, The excess hydrodynamic pressure could be obtained from the linear Stoke's equation with continuity equation assuming no slip boundary conditions at both the air/water and solid/water interfaces. It has already been shown that the no-slip boundary condition can be used for the air/water interface in the wetting film of pure water ( Under the boundary conditions that The curvature pressure can be obtained from the following relation ( Substituting Eqs.    As shown above, film drainage is controlled initially by Above we have discussed the results of our drainage experiments conducted using wetting films of smaller radii. These films do not form dimples and remain approximately spherical even at the center of the film. Large diameter films (   We have studied the kinetics of film thinning by monitoring the temporal and spatial profiles of the wetting films formed on the gold surfaces treated with potassium amyl xanthate (KAX). The results have been analyzed using the Reynolds lubrication theory to determine the excess pressures ( Authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the