The Shijia gold deposit, classified as a Linglong-type (quartz vein-type) gold deposit, is located in the north of Qixia-Penglai gold belt in the Jiaodong Peninsula. The orebodies predominantly occurring as quartz-sulfide veins are hosted in the Early Cretaceous Guojialing amphibole-bearing monzogranite and strictly controlled by NNE- to NE-striking high-angle faults. Hydrothermal minerals include K-feldspar, quartz, sericite, pyrite, sphalerite, galena, chalcopyrite, calcite and fluorite. Based on the mineralogical, textural and field cross-cutting relationships, the mineralization process can be divided into three stages: (I) quartz-sericite-pyrite stage, (Ⅱ) quartz-sulfide-gold stage and (III) quartz-calcite-fluorite stage. Field investigation shows that the orebodies have undergone several times of deformation after their formation, resulting in the deformation and discontinuity of the orebodies. Early Cretaceous dykes, including granite pegmatite, lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry, are developed in the Shijia gold deposit. The crosscutting relationship between orebodies and various mafic-felsic dykes shows that their formation sequence is granite pegmatite, Au orebody, lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry. LA-ICP-MS zircon U-Pb dating shows that the emplacement ages of granite pegmatite, lamprophyre, diabase, and granite porphyry are 129.7 ± 1.6 Ma, 129.3 ± 1.4 Ma, 128.3 ± 1.3 Ma and 120.0 ± 1.1 Ma, respectively. These dating results are consistent with the crosscutting phenomenon observed in the field, indicating that the mineralization time of the Shijia gold deposit is between 129.7 Ma and 129.3 Ma. The timing of gold mineralization at Shijia coincides with the large-scale thinning of the lithosphere in the North China Craton during the Early Cretaceous, indicating that the formation of the deposit is mainly controlled by extensional tectonics. Because the gold mineralization was predated the emplacement of lamprophyre and diabase dykes, there might be not a direct genetic relationship between the gold mineralization and the mafic dykes in the Shijia gold deposit.The Jiaodong gold province, located in the Jiaodong Peninsula, east of the North China Craton (NCC), is one of the largest provinces of granitoid-hosted lode-gold deposits in the world ( Previous studies show that the emplacement time of various types of dykes in Jiaodong ranges from 132 to 113 Ma ( The Jiaodong gold province is located in the Jiaobei Uplift on the southeastern margin of NCC, with the Jiaolai Basin in the south. On the west and east of the district are the Luxi Block and Su-Lu Ultrahigh Pressure Metamorphic (UHP) Belt, which are separated by the regional Tan-Lu Fault and Wulian-Yantai Fault, respectively. From west to east, the Jiaodong gold province can be divided into Zhaoyuan-Laizhou, Penglai-Qixia and Muping-Rushan gold belts ( The strata exposed near the Shijia gold deposit include the Neoarchaean Jiaodong Group, the Paleoproterozoic Fenzishan Group, the Neoproterozoic Penglai Group, and the Mesozoic Lower Cretaceous Laiyang and Qingshan Groups ( The regional tectonic framework is characterized by a series of predominantly NNE-trending faults with less commonly NE-, NW-, and nearly NS- and EW-trending faults ( Magmatic rocks are widely distributed in the district, dominated by Neoarchean, Paleoproterozoic and Mesozoic intrusive rocks. Mesozoic mafic-felsic dykes are also well developed ( The Shijia gold deposit is located in the Penglai City, Eastern Shandong Province, approximately 1 km northeast of the small town Daliuhang, at an elevation between 60 and 139 m above sea level. It is a medium-sized, granitoid-hosted quartz vein-type gold deposit, with an average grade of 6.74 g/t Au and the Au reserve of more than 10 t. Mesozoic granitic rocks cover the entire area of the deposit. The Guojialing amphibole-bearing monzogranite in the west and the Linglong garnet-bearing monzogranite in the east are separated by the NNE-trending Huluxian fault. Basic to felsic dykes including lamprophyre, diabase, granite pegmatite and granite porphyry are also developed in the district ( The orebodies are predominantly hosted in the Guojialing amphibole-bearing monzogranite and occur typically as auriferous quartz veins filling the NE-trending faults. Three largest ore veins (orebodies) in the deposit include No. 1, No. 326 and No. 334 veins ( The No. 1 vein is the largest orebody and located in the western part of the ore district, with a strike length of 1010 m, a maximum dip depth of 1030 m and an average thickness of 0.9 m. It strikes NNW 350° to NNE 25°, and dips from 61° to 89° to the east ( The No. 326 vein, accounting for approximately 29% of the ore reserves, is located in the mid-west of the district, about 100 to 200 m to the east of the No. 1 vein. It is divided into two sub-orebodies, i.e., the No. 326-2 and No. 326-3 ( The No. 334 vein is approximately 50 to 200 m to the east of the No. 326 vein and consists of two orebodies of No. 334-1 and No. 334-2. The No. 334-1 orebody is 280 m long and extends for about 330 m along its dip, with a thickness of 0.19 to 2.02 m (average 0.77 m), and the gold grade of 1.20 to 60.00 g/t (average 10.78 g/t). The No. 334-2 orebody is about 250 m long and 0.19 to 2.02 m thick (average 0.78 m), with gold grade ranging from 1.00 to 72.20 g/t (average 7.72 g/t). The main vein strikes nearly S-N, and dips from 59° to 90° (72° on average) to the east ( Mineralization in the Shijia gold deposit occurs predominantly as fault- or fracture-filling auriferous quartz-sulfide veins with small amounts of disseminated ores in the altered wall rocks adjacent to main lodes ( Hydrothermal alteration at the Shijia gold deposit occurs commonly as narrow, typically 20 to 50 cm wide haloes enveloping quartz vein and includes potassic alteration, silicification, sericitization, sulfidation and carbonatization ( Based on the mineralogy, texture and crosscutting relationships ( (I) Quartz (Qz Hydrothermal minerals of this stage include quartz, pyrite, and sericite. Quartz occurs as fine-grained, milky white veins or is pervasive in altered monzogranite. The quartz veins are locally fractured and cemented by later stage smoky gray or milky white quartz ( (II) Quartz (Qz This is the main ore stage and often forms high-grade quartz vein ores in the Shijia gold deposit. Hydrothermal minerals mainly include quartz, pyrite and sphalerite, with a small amount of galena, chalcopyrite and native gold. Quartz of this stage is typically smoky gray to milky white, and occurs commonly as veins with a width varying from 10 to 50 cm. Smokey gray quartz (Qz (III) Quartz (Qz Hydrothermal minerals of this stage mainly include quartz and calcite, locally with minor fluorite. Quartz is milky white to gray and occurs often as veins along with white to pink calcite ( Affected by later tectonic-magmatic activities, the orebodies suffered several times of deformation after formation. Regional strike-slip movements caused the discontinuity and the lens-like shape of orebodies ( The dykes exposed in the ore district include granite pegmatite, lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry, and they all intruded into the Guojialing monzogranite. Field investigation shows that there is a clear crosscutting relationship between orebodies and dykes. Granite pegmatites are usually cut and displaced by gold-bearing quartz veins and were altered near the orebody, indicating that granite pegmatites were predated the gold mineralization ( Obvious crosscutting relationships were also observed among different dykes. Granite pegmatites are truncated and dislocated not only by gold-bearing quartz veins, but also by lamprophyre and diabase dykes ( Samples for LA-ICP-MS zircon U-Pb dating were collected from the underground mine and include granite pegmatite, lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry. The granite pegmatite sample (WJY-1Zr) was collected near the No. 28 exploration line at the −475 m level. Samples for lamprophyre (HBY-1Zr) and diabase samples (SCBY-1Zr) were collected from the No. 76 exploration line at the −395 m level. Granite porphyry (SYBY-1Zr) was gathered from the No. 16 exploration line at the −435 m level ( Zircon U-Pb dating was conducted using a Thermo Fisher’s X-Series Ⅱ ICP-MS instrument connected with a Coherent GeoLasPro-193 nm laser at the State Key Laboratory of Geological Processes and Mineral Resources, China University of Geosciences, Beijing. Helium was used as the carrier gas and was mixed with argon prior to entering the ICP-MS torch. All data were acquired on zircon in single-spot ablation mode using a spot size of 32 μm with 6 Hz laser pulse repetition rate. Isotope measurements were using zircon 91,500 as the external standard for U-Th-Pb isotopic ratios ( The zircon U-Pb analytical results are summarized in Zircon grains in the sample WJY-1Zr from granite pegmatite are colourless or light-brown, transparent to translucent, euhedral to subhedral prismatic with a length varying from 80 to 250 μm and length to width ratios ranging from 1:1 to 5:1. They show clear oscillatory zoning in CL images ( Zircons from the sample HBY-1Zr of lamprophyre dyke are colourless or light-brown, transparent to translucent, and euhedral to subhedral. They typically have a prismatic morphology with a length varying from 50 to 200 μm and length to width ratios ranging between 1:1 and 4:1, and show clear oscillatory zoning in CL images ( Zircon grains in the sample SCBY-1Zr from the diabase dyke are colourless, transparent, and generally euhedral with a length ranging from 50 to 100 μm. They show a short-prismatic morphology with length to width ratios varying from 1:1 to 3:1, and clear oscillating zoning ( The zircons from the sample SYBY-1Zr of granite porphyry are colourless, transparent, and euhedral with a long-prismatic morphology and clear oscillatory zoning ( Previous isotopic dating using different geochronological methods, including Ar-Ar isotopic dating on sericite and quartz, Rb-Sr isochron age of pyrite and SHRIMP U-Pb age of hydrothermal zircons, has shown that the gold deposits in the Jiaodong Peninsula formed in a relatively short period in the Early Cretaceous. In the Pengjiakuang gold deposit, gold-bearing quartz from brecciated and veinlet ores yielded There is yet no report on the mineralization time for the Shijia gold deposit. As described above, the obvious crosscutting relationship between the ore veins and different types of dykes at Shijia has made it possible to limit the timing of mineralization. The LA-ICP-MS zircon U-Pb isotopic dating in this study shows that the emplacement ages of granite pegmatite, lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry in the deposit are 129.7 ± 1.6 Ma, 129.3 ± 1.4 Ma, 128.3 ± 1.3 Ma and 120.0 ± 1.1 Ma, respectively. Field observation indicates that the gold mineralization was postdated the emplacement of granite pegmatite but predated the emplacement of lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry dykes, the mineralization age is thus confined between 129.7 Ma and 129.3 Ma, consistent to most of the gold deposits in the Jiaodong Peninsula. The consistency of the mineralization age at Shijia with other gold deposits in Jiaodong implies that they were formed within a relatively short time period and might have formed under the same tectonic setting with a similar genetic mechanism. In many cases, lamprophyres derived from the ancient enriched lithospheric mantle, especially calc-alkaline lamprophyres, are closely associated with lode-gold deposits. Compared with other igneous rocks, lamprophyres commonly have higher average gold abundances, and lamprophyre magmas are generally rich in volatiles (e.g., CO Although the ores share the similar isotopic characteristics with the various types of wall rocks, the late-Archean and Paleoproterozoic metamorphic rocks and the late-Jurassic Linglong and Luanjiahe granitoids are ruled out because they were metamorphosed or emplaced earlier than the mineralization (  The Shijia gold deposit is a quartz vein-type gold deposit hosted in the Early Cretaceous Guojialing amphibole-bearing monzogranite. Orebodies are strictly controlled by NNE- to NE-striking high-angle faults and occur as quartz veins accompanied by silicification, sericitization, sulfidation and carbonatization. The mineralization process can be divided into three stages, namely the quartz-sericite-pyrite stage, the quartz-sulfide-gold stage and the quartz-calcite-fluorite stage. Granite pegmatite, lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry occur as dykes and are widely distributed in the Shijia gold deposit. The crosscutting relationship between orebodies and mafic-felsic dykes shows that the sequence of their formation is granite pegmatite, orebodies, lamprophyre, diabase and granite porphyry. The emplacement ages obtained the LA-ICP-MS zircon U-Pb isotopic dating on granite pegmatite, lamprophyre, diabase, and granite porphyry are 129.7 ± 1.6 Ma, 129.3 ± 1.4 Ma, 128.3 ± 1.3 Ma and 120.0 ± 1.1 Ma, respectively, indicating that the mineralization age of the Shijia gold deposit is between 129.7 Ma and 129.3 Ma, at ca. 129 Ma. The Shijia gold deposit was formed under the background of extension and thinning of the NCC. The space and time connection between lamprophyres and orebodies may not imply a direct genetic relationship, but be related to their common tectonic setting and migration channel. The authors would like to thank the staff of the Penglai Wantai Mining Co., Ltd for their support and guidance in the field. The manuscript has been significantly improved from constructive comments by Dr. Yanlu Xing from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: