Nanocomposites consisting of a nanocrystalline Ni matrix (grain sizes 15–20 nm) reinforced with sub-micron size SiC particulates up to 3 wt.% have been produced by pulsed current electrodeposition. Microhardness values were about two times higher than those for comparable polycrystalline Ni–SiC composites, primarily due to the hard nanocrystalline Ni matrix.Extensive research efforts, over the past decade and a half, have concentrated on conventional D.C. electroplating, pulse plating and electroless plating, as well as co-deposition processes to produce nanocrystalline materials Fundamentally, electrodeposition will result in nanostructured materials when electrodeposition parameters (e.g. bath composition, pH, temperature, overpotential, etc.) are chosen such that electrocrystallization results in massive nucleation and reduced grain growth. Electrocrystallization occurs via two competing processes (i.e. the build up of existing crystals and the formation of new ones) which are influenced by different factors. The major rate-determining steps have been revealed to be charge transfer at the electrode surface and surface diffusion of adions on the crystal surface The purpose of the present study was to prepare bulk samples of a novel “nanocomposite”-nickel silicon carbide (Ni–SiC), consisting of a nanocrystalline nickel matrix and a microcrystalline SiC reinforcement via a co-deposition method utilizing pulse electroplating and to determine the SiC content, microstructure, grain size and hardness of the resulting nanocomposite samples. A modified Watts-type solution, consisting of nickel chloride, nickel sulfate, boric acid, 5 g/l saccharin, and 20 or 100 g/l β-silicon carbide (average diameter 0.4±0.2 μm) was used to produce Ni–SiC electrodeposits. The pH was adjusted to a constant value of 4.5 by adding nickel carbonate to raise it or hydrochloric/sulphuric acid (ratio 1:7) to lower it. In an attempt to prevent agglomeration of the sub-micron size particles of SiC, small amounts of powder were progressively premixed in a beaker with a small quantity of Watts-type solution and added as a slurry to the bulk solution for final bath concentrations of 20 and 100 g/l, respectively. In the present work, pulsed electrodeposition was carried out galvanostatically using cathodic square waves with complete current cut-off during the interval between the pulses. The pulse plating parameters consisted of a duty cycle (i.e. pulse on time divided by pulse on time plus pulse off time) between 33.3% and 100% (i.e. direct current) and peak current densities (i.e. average current density divided by duty cycle) up to 0.9 A/cm The electrodeposits were mechanically stripped from the cathode substrate for microstructural characterization using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and Vicker's microhardness testing. The grain size of the Ni-matrix of the materials was determined using the Scherrer line broadening method The deposits had a smooth and very shiny surface and ranged in thickness from 120 to about 550 μm, depending on the pulse plating parameters used. The concentration of SiC in the samples varied from a minimum of 0.1±0.1 wt.% for a plating solution concentration of 20 g/l SiC to a maximum of 2.9±0.1 wt.% for a Watts bath containing 100 g/l SiC. Several factors affected the concentration of SiC in the electrodeposits including current density, duty cycle, solution agitation and concentration of SiC in the plating solution. For example, SiC concentration in the plating solution and peak current density demonstrated the most pronounced effects. Increasing the concentration of SiC in the solution produced a corresponding increase of SiC in the deposit while increasing the peak current density decreased the amount of SiC in the deposits. (See A typical microstructure, consisting of irregular shaped particles of SiC embedded in a nanocrystalline Ni matrix, is revealed by the SEM micrograph of a Ni–SiC electrodeposit shown in The grain size measurements for the Ni matrix, using XRD in conjunction with the Scherrer method The darkfield TEM micrograph of the nanocrystalline Ni matrix between SiC particles in the first sample is shown in By direct measurement of a darkfield TEM micrograph of the second sample, the average grain size was calculated to be 19.6±9.4 nm which was very close to the value obtained by the Scherrer method, 19.5 nm. A scatter plot of microhardness values as a function of wt.% SiC in the nanocomposites is shown in It is of interest to note that the hardness values of the Ni–SiC nanocomposite samples are close to the hardness for pure nanocrystalline Ni of comparable grain sizes. For example, the hardness value for pure nanocrystalline Ni of grain size 20 nm was previously found to be 620 kg/mm In order to further assess the various possible strengthening mechanisms in nanocomposite materials produced in the present study, a comparison with the results obtained for a different group of nanocomposites can be made. This group of composites consists of a conventional polycrystalline Ni matrix reinforced with nanocrystalline Al A dislocation-particle interaction or Orowan hardening mechanism does not appear to be operative in the nanocomposite Ni–SiC samples produced in the present work since a major increase in hardness is not observed when the SiC content is increased at relatively constant grain size in the nanometer range (i.e. ≤20 nm). At very small matrix grain sizes in the nanocrystalline range dislocation models are meaningful only within certain limitations. For example, the original dislocation model for the Hall–Petch relation was based on the concept that grain boundaries act as barriers to dislocation motion, thus forming dislocation pile-ups at grain boundaries. Pile-up models become questionable when the pile-up length is of the order of 10–100 nm (i.e. the nanocrystalline range) since the number of dislocations in a pile-up is rapidly decreasing with decreasing grain size Nanocomposite coatings consisting of submicron size SiC particles embedded in a nanocrystalline Ni-matrix with grain sizes down to 15 nm and SiC concentrations up to approximately 3 wt.% were produced via electrodeposition from a modified Watts bath. Although the nanocomposite Ni–SiC samples produced were over four times harder than conventional grain size annealed Ni and about two times harder than regular grain size nickel metal matrix composites with similar concentrations of SiC, a significant increase in hardness with increasing SiC in the electrodeposits was not observed. In fact, the hardness values were close to those for pure nanocrystalline Ni of comparable grain size. The authors wish to thank P. Nolan for his technical assistance in this study and Dr. Abdel El-Sherik for stimulating discussions. Financial support provided by the School of Graduate Studies and Research of Queen's University, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Ontario Power Generation is greatly appreciated.