During endochondral and desmal osteogenesis, mineralization of bone and cartilage matrix requires an appropriate solubility product of calcium and phosphate, collagen as a nucleator and deactivation of inhibitors, in order to prevent heterotopic calcification. In the 1960s, Fleisch and coworkers detected pyrophosphate (PPi) as an inhibitor of hydroxyapatite crystal growth, which should be removed by cleavage to tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) activity. This theory had been established by basic experiments performed with collagen gels and demineralized matrices. In order to investigate the effect of PPi on matrix mineralization in bone and cartilage, calcium content and TNAP activity were measured in organoid cultures of mouse calvarial osteoblasts and limb bud cartilage after treatment with PPi and/or levamisole. In organoid cultures, bone and cartilage develop in a clear histotypical manner. PPi did not induce mineralization. Beta-glycerophosphate (β-GP) and inorganic phosphate (Pi) induced mineralization which could be significantly reduced by PPi. Levamisole, an inhibitor of TNAP, also reduced mineralization; the combination with PPi was additive. TNAP activity was increased after treatment with PPi and levamisole in both osteoblast and cartilage cultures. Mineralization induced by β-GP and Pi decreased TNAP activity in the osteoblast but not in cartilage organoid culture. In this culture system, PPi reduced mineralization as predicted by Fleisch's theory. Indications of cleavage of PPi were indirectly found because inhibition of hydrolysis of PPi by levamisole further reduced mineralization, probably due to the higher amounts of PPi available for binding to hydroxyapatite.The final process in osteogenesis, fracture repair and bone remodeling is the mineralization of bone matrix, the osteoid, during desmoid, and of cartilage matrix during endochondral bone development. Although plasma is supersaturated for calcium phosphate precipitation ( In the early 1960s, a hypothesis of mineralization was postulated which included an appropriate solubility product of Ca and inorganic phosphate (Pi) and the collagen fibril as a nucleator ( This concept of mineralization introduced by Fleisch et al. seems to be the common view, but, to my knowledge, it is not described in current textbooks of histology. In addition, this theory of Fleisch and coworkers has not yet been verified by using appropriate mineralizing In order to investigate the influence of PPi on mineralization in a histotypical NMRI mice were kept under specific pathogen-free conditions under a constant 12-h light/dark cycle. On gestational day 12 (day 0=day of conception), the mice were anesthetized by CO Pregnant NMRI mice of day 18 of gestation were anesthetized with CO All cultures were grown at the medium/air interface at 37 After an incubation period of 14 or 21 days, the cultures were washed twice in 155 TNAP activity of the supernatant was measured spectrophotometrically as a time-dependent change in extinction at 405 Four cultures per group were included in each experiment. Between two and five independent experimental series were performed (for details see “Legends”). Mean and standard deviation were calculated from all identically treated cultures; Initial experimental series were performed to test whether the addition of sodium PPi would result in mineralization of the cartilaginous or osteogenic matrix. Mineralization caused by PPi would indicate its hydrolysis in the cultures. In cartilage cultures, PPi was added at concentrations of 0.01, 0.1 and 1.0 Cartilage and calvarial cell organoid cultures were each treated with 5 In organoid cultures of calvarial osteoblasts, mineralization induced by The addition of 3 In calvarial cell cultures also, 3 The results show that PPi reduces One point of discussion is the comparability of the A second point is the concentration of PPi present at the site of mineralization The solubility product of Ca and Pi is high enough for precipitation on an appropriate nucleator, such as the collagen fibril ( A third point to be discussed is the alteration of TNAP activity after treatment with PPi and the TNAP inhibitor levamisole, and after initiation of mineralization by PPi increased TNAP activity in both cartilage and osteoblast cultures. In addition, an increase in TNAP activity was distinctly measurable in both cartilage and bone matrix mineralization when organic phosphate was added together with an inhibitor, either PPi or levamisole. This increase was only moderately expressed after treatment with Pi plus the inhibitors. As expected, levamisole in combination with PPi did not induce mineralization, but it decreased TNAP activity in cartilage organoid culture. On the other hand, levamisole in combination with Very interesting are the results after treatment with the triple combination Pi+levamisole+PPi and In general, inhibition of TNAP activity should be measured after levamisole treatment. However, an increase of TNAP activity was measured in this In conclusion, PPi reduced desmoid as well as cartilage mineralization and increased TNAP activity. This was shown in a histotypic organoid culture system reflecting the situation This work has been supported by grants from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft awarded to GRK 325/2-00. The author thanks the Institute of Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology, Free University of Berlin, for their support.