The paper deals with fluidized bed gasification of a biomass for producing a syngas with optimized hydrogen yield thanks to in-bed catalysis. Four different bed materials have been adopted: inert quartzite as reference case, olivine and dolomite as natural catalysts, and Ni-alumina as artificial catalyst. The gasification tests have been carried out at steady state in a pilot-scale bubbling fluidized bed, under operating conditions typical for gasification as reported in the paper. The gas analyses have been performed with dedicated instrumentation, like continuous analyzers and gas chromatograph, and adopting a standard protocol for tar sampling and characterization. The influence of the catalytic materials on the concentration of stable gases (e.g. H2, CO2, CO, CH4 and light hydrocarbons) as well as on the efficiency of tar conversion has been studied. In particular the artificial catalyst has the largest effectiveness in enhancing the H2 yield as well as in tar reduction. The catalyst gives rise to an elutriation rate significantly lower than that observed for dolomite at comparable U/U
                     mf ratio, denoting a better mechanical resistance. A stable activity of the nickel–alumina catalyst has been observed for the whole duration of reaction tests suggesting that no deactivation phenomena occurred, due to coke deposition or morphological modifications of the particles.The biomass fuels represent an abundantly available, renewable energy resource with CO Catalytic tar decomposition is considered as a technology with the highest potential to contribute to the solution of this problem For fluidized bed application, the catalyst requirements include not only high chemical activity but also good mechanical properties, availability and low price. Dolomite and olivine are acknowledged as suitable natural bed materials for fluidized bed gasification with appreciable catalytic activity The present paper deals with fluidized bed gasification of a biomass fuel and reports the results of an experimental research aimed at maximizing the hydrogen yield and tar reduction. A particular novel aspect of the research is the utilization as bed material of two natural catalyst (olivine and dolomite) and a purposely developed catalyst (Ni–alumina). With respect to the base case of an inert bed, the influence of catalytic materials on the concentration of stable gases (e.g. H The scheme of the gasification facility is shown in Distilled water is fed by means of a peristaltic pump with adjustable rate (0–1.8 Gasification products are sampled isokinetically inside the reactor and passed through a hot quartz fiber thimble to collect solid particles and in sequence through a condenser system to trap tars and water. The concentration of permanent gases are measured on-line by means of continuous analyzers for H Four different materials, namely quartzite, olivine, dolomite and a Ni dispersed on γ-alumina (Al Spruce wood pellets have been used as fuel, whose properties are reported in The operating conditions of the gasification tests are reported in Steady state tests of gasification have been carried out following a standard experimental procedure. The reactor is heated up to the desired temperature (700–800 Under steady conditions of the monitored variables, namely temperatures and gas molar fractions, the measurements are taken and recorded. Concerning sampling, a 15 The solid particles in the hot filter and the sample at the cyclone are weighed after the experiments; their size distribution is determined off-line by means of a laser granulometer. The liquid phase products are weighed, separately with respect to their dew point. Then, both the condensate at ambient temperature and at low temperature are dissolved in dichloromethane, to separate water from tar. The speciation of the condensed heavy tars (dew point higher than 20 A sample of the syngas is also analyzed off-line line by a micro-gas chromatograph AGILENT equipped with TCD detectors in order to determine the presence of light hydrocarbons.  The tar concentration in the syngas evaluated on the basis of both condensation steps (i.e. at room temperature and at −10 From the comparison of tests 1, 2, 5 and 6, it appears that the bed height has a marginal influence on the gas composition and tar reduction, the largest effect being appreciable only for H  Limited generation and in turn elutriation of fine particles, evaluated by weighing the solid collected at both the cyclone and filter, respectively, have been observed using quartzite and olivine as bed materials. More in detail, the dimensionless elutriation rates evaluated with respect to dry fuel feeding rate are 6.3 It is worth to note that the A stable activity of the catalyst has been observed for the whole duration of the reaction tests, up to 120 The biomass gasification tests carried out in a pilot scale fluidized bed with different bed materials confirm that the composition of the syngas as well as the tar concentration are appreciably modified in presence of catalytic materials. The olivine slightly improves the hydrogen content in the syngas and contributes to tar conversion in lighter hydrocarbons. The dolomite has a more marked effect, whereas the Ni-based catalyst exerts the largest role in improving the gasification performance. The tar concentration is reduced of around 50% with the nickel–alumina catalyst with respect to the reference test carried out in quartzite. The tar nature is also affected by the presence of the catalyst, a simplification of chemical species detected in the tar (e.g. hydrocarbons with five rings) being revealed by the chromatographic analysis. The catalyst gives rise to an elutriation rate about 3.6 times lower than that observed for dolomite at comparable A stable activity of the catalyst has been observed for the whole duration of the reaction tests, up to 120 The poor char conversion as well as the role played by the bed fluid-dynamics, as revealed by the low effect of the bed height, are also relevant in order to improve the gasifier performance. This matter deserves further investigation with both experimental and theoretical approaches. Authors are indebted to A. Cante for the assistance during fluidized bed gasification tests and V. Stanzione for chemical analyses. The research has been carried out in the frame of FLEXGAS project funded by the Research Fund for Coal and Steel, European Commission (contract N. RFCR-CT-2007-0005).