A series of diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol (myristyl alcohol) was synthesized by using decanedioic, dodecanedioic and tetradecanedioic acids under vacuum and in the absence of catalyst for the first time. These diesters were particularly investigated in terms of their thermo-physical properties to be further used as phase change materials (PCMs) in thermal energy storage. High purity syntheses were controlled via FT-IR, GC–MS and elemental analyses and thermo-physical properties were determined with differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) and thermo-gravimetric analyzer (TGA). Thermal properties of the diesters were expressed in terms of phase change temperature, enthalpy, specific heat (C
                     
                        p
                     ), thermal decomposition and reliability after 1000 thermal cycles with necessary statistical data. In addition to that, the GC–MS data were also presented to specify the mass fragmentation fingerprints of the diesters. The yield of diester formation was found to be in the range of 95–97%. The DSC analyses indicated that the melting temperatures of the high-chain diesters with myristyl alcohol were between 50°C and 58°C with phase change enthalpy above 200kJ/kg. The results showed that these materials were favorable for low temperature heat transfer applications with successful thermal properties and reliability.Effective utilization of primary and renewable energy sources relies on creating smart and rational solutions to the mismatch between supply and demand. Thermal energy storage offers flexibility to play key role in several energy sources, such as solar energy, geothermal energy or industrial waste heat. Thermal energy storage systems storing heat in the form of latent heat by using PCMs provide high heat storage capacity, small unit size and isothermal behavior during heat transfer processes. The fundamentals of its methodology can be found in various sources in literature The efficiency of such thermal energy storage systems depends on mainly the thermal properties of the macro- or micro-encapsulated PCM and the developed engineering design. The designs have direct influence on performance of heat deposition and transportation. However, they do not guarantee technical reliability and economic attractiveness of the systems on their own. At this point, PCM selection plays an important role in defining the heat deposition properties and sustainability of the systems in practice. In basic thermo-physical means, a PCM has been defined by its phase change enthalpy values and melting/freezing temperatures Today, inorganic PCMs, like hydrated salts, have been preferred in thermal energy storage due to their high volumetric storage density, relatively high thermal conductivity and moderate costs compared to paraffin waxes. However, problems like supercooling, phase segregation and corrosiveness limit their direct utilization. Even if some solutions have been suggested in literature, they result in either reduction of the storage density with lower rate of crystallization or decrease in thermal conductivity of the mixture Among the reported organic PCMs in literature, high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols have recently attracted the attention of researchers as novel organic phase change materials. These materials have high latent heat storage capacity with insignificant supercooling tendency, superior thermal reliability after 1000 thermal cycles and phase change temperatures in the range of 29 Based on the reported advantageous thermal and chemical properties of the high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols, the aim of this paper is to present the possible use of the diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with higher alcohols, such as 1-tetradecanol, as novel organic phase change materials for thermal energy storage. The esterification procedure of Baykut and Aydın The diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol were prepared by using 1-tetradecanol (97%), decanedioic acid (99%), dodecanedioic acid (99%) and tetradecanedioic acid (99%) from Sigma-Aldrich. All the reagents were used without further purification. Ethanol and acetone were used as crystallization solvents for the purification of the final products of the syntheses. FT-IR spectra of the synthesized high-chain diesters were recorded on Perkin Elmer FT-IR Spectrum 100 spectrometer with universal ATR accessory between 4000–380 GC–MS analyses were conducted with Agilent 7890A GC system and Agilent 5975C inert XL EI/CI MSD with Triple-Axis Detector by use of non-polar capillary GC column of Agilent HP-5MS stationary phase (30 Elemental analysis of the synthesized high-chain diesters were conducted with Thermo Finnigan Flash EA 1112 model analyzer which is capable of analyzing the carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen content of the samples. Perkin Elmer Jade DSC was used for the calorimeter analyses of the novel PCMs. The measurements were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 DSC analyses were conducted according to the ASTM standard test methods with designation numbers E 792-06 and D 2766-95, explaining the determination of enthalpies of fusion and freezing and specific heat of liquids and solids, respectively Perkin Elmer STA-6000 was used for the thermo-gravimetric decomposition of the novel PCMs with temperature, including the decomposition behavior, onset and 5% weight loss temperatures of the materials. The analyses were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 The analyses were conducted according to the general principles given in BS EN ISO 11358:1997 In this research, Bio-Rad MJ Mini DNA thermal cycler was used to provide automated 1000 thermal heating and cooling cycles in order to observe the thermal performance of each PCM. Each PCM was cycled in the temperature interval of 25 The esterification procedure of Baykut and Aydın Similar to the reported procedure The reaction conversion rates of diesters were found to be around 95–97 (w/w) % which are similar to the yields reported by Baykut and Aydın The diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol which were synthesized in this research are listed in The purity of the synthesized diesters was continuously controlled after successive extractions by FT-IR analyses and the elemental analysis of the final purified product proved the purity of the synthesized diesters. The FT-IR spectra of the final diester products are given in The reagents contain hydroxyl groups which give significant absorptions. Fatty acids show very broad trough of bonded oxygenhydrogen stretching vibrations between 2500–2700 The absence of hydroxyl stretching vibrations of alcohol and the bonded hydrogenoxygen stretching of fatty acids on the spectra show that the final crystallized products are free of any unreacted alcohol or fatty acid impurities. The carbonyl stretching vibrations of acyclic saturated esters are seen around 1732 In addition to the given FT-IR spectra of each diester product, the close similarity between the calculated and measured elemental analysis data show once again the purity of the synthesized final products. The comparison of the calculated and found elemental analysis data is given below for each diester, respectively.    GC–MS analyses were performed by use of non-polar capillary GC column and electron impact ionization (EI) technique for chromatographic separation and detection, respectively. The carboxylic acid diesters eluted at 25.2, 33.9 and 30.9 The MS data clearly indicate the fragmentation patterns of dicarboxylic acid diesters. The first two main fragmentation steps leading to abundant ions are the same for the three diesters of 1-tetradecanol and the lost ions belong to alcohol–H and alcohol–H    The saturated high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols have uniform phase change behavior with single and sharp phase changes at constant temperatures. They exhibit insignificant supercooling tendency and they have stable thermal properties after 1000 thermal cycles The investigated diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol have phase change temperature between 50 Besides the insignificant supercooling tendency in the melting temperature range of 50 Most of the researchers ignore the determination of the specific heat capacity due to the lower amount of thermal storage in the form of sensible heat. However, it has an additional side effect on total thermal energy storage capacity of the materials and it is better to investigate the change of specific heat values with temperature to obtain more thermal data for engineering approaches. The specific heat values of the diesters are presented as a function of temperature for both solid and liquid phases with data reliability around ±3%. The equations are generated according to the measured data and they represent the temperature interval where no phase change occurs between 10 The average specific heat values of solid and liquid states decrease with increasing dicarboxylic acid chain length. The diester of decanedioic acid has the highest average specific heat values among the three investigated diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol. The average specific heat values of solid and liquid states are given in Thermal energy storage materials with minimum changes in phase change enthalpy and temperature after several thermal cycles are preferred to utilize in energy storage applications. Good thermal reliability of a PCM provides long term employment of the thermal units in larger scale. Therefore, thermal reliability should be determined before introducing new materials to the literature as novel PCMs. The thermal reliability of the PCMs was determined by 1000 automated thermal cycles, which were conducted by a DNA thermal cycler in temperature interval of 25 The introduced materials preserved their thermal properties after 1000 phase change cycles. They showed insignificant changes in phase change temperatures and enthalpies which were less than 1%. The insignificant changes in thermal properties and absence of any secondary peak formations in the DSC graphs clarified that the materials did not show any phase segregation or chemical decomposition as a result of thermal cycling. In addition to the high latent heat values, their good thermal reliability made them suitable candidates for low temperature thermal applications. The changes in phase change temperatures and enthalpies are given in The TGA results are important to determine the temperature limit which the material can withstand without chemical decomposition. They define the highest temperature at which material preserves its structure. Therefore, the 5% weight loss and onset decomposition temperatures are important parameters for selecting an encapsulation process which takes place with exothermic reaction steps. The TGA results show that these materials can withstand coacervation processes which take place at elevated temperatures. The onset decomposition and 5% weight loss temperatures of all presented diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol are above 300 New PCMs with better thermal reliability and thermal energy storage capacity are needed in order to increase the variety of alternative materials for different thermal energy storage applications. The currently available organic and inorganic PCMs in the market suffer from several problems like high costs or thermal instability. The introduced diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol offer quite good thermal properties. Their melting temperatures vary between 50 Both the thermal results of high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols presented in literature Based on the presented results, it can be concluded that the introduced diesters of high-chain dicarboxylic acids with 1-tetradecanol are promising PCMs for low temperature thermal energy storage with their advantageous thermal properties, similar to the high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols. The author thanks to the Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Marmara University, Istanbul-Turkey for the additional instrumental support.