A novel process has been developed for the fixation of arsenic using the formation of scorodite. Stable scorodite particles were produced by introducing an oxidizing gas into a reaction mixture containing ferrous sulfate and arsenic(V) at high concentration to convert the ferrous ion to ferric ion. This approach to scorodite synthesis enabled the reaction to proceed in the presence of sulfuric acid under atmospheric pressure. The influence of zinc, copper, and sodium ions in the solution was investigated; as well as the effect of pure O2 gas and air as the oxidizing agent and the effect of arsenic concentration and pH of the reaction mixture. Scorodite grains were precipitated even though the reaction system contained co-existing ions at high concentration. It was found that zinc did not affect the synthesis and that the presence of copper yielded a good scorodite product. However, the presence of sodium inhibited the formation of scorodite. An initial pH under 2 was significant for producing well-crystallized scorodite and avoiding conditions favorable for jarosite formation.Arsenic is a common impurity found in the non-ferrous metallurgical industry. A novel approach to atmospheric scorodite synthesis for the fixation of arsenic has been developed. The key feature of the process is the precipitation of scorodite by oxidizing ferrous ions contained in a high concentration arsenic(V) solution. In previous studies ( Several authors have investigated the behavior of impurities in jarosite formation ( The purpose of this work is to confirm the influence of several co-existing predominant cations in the scorodite process. Assuming that scorodite is synthesized in an industrial hydrometallurgy process, the main cations that have high solubility are zinc and copper. Other elements are usually present in minor concentrations. However, it was felt necessary to also investigate the effect of sodium as an impurity, in preference to potassium and magnesium, which led us to explore the influence of the pH on the scorodite reaction. The high concentration arsenic solution used in the previous studies was employed again. The physical and chemical properties of this solution are shown in A commercially available solution of arsenic(V) was used for the experiments evaluating the influence of copper, the effect of arsenic in the presence of sodium ion, and the impact of initial pH levels with addition of NaOH. This arsenic(V) solution, purchased from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., contained 60%As(V) acid with a specific gravity of 1.59 kg/L. This gave an arsenic(V) concentration of 500 g/L, which was confirmed by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analysis. Analytical-reagent grade iron(II) sulfate 7-hydrate was used as the iron source together with, zinc sulfate 7-hydrate, copper sulfate 5-hydrate and either sodium sulfate or sodium hydroxide. Oxidation was performed by bubbling either 99.9% oxygen or air into the reactor from compressed gas cylinders. The same apparatus and procedures were used as described earlier ( The first experimental series was conducted to investigate the effect of 40 g/L zinc, copper and sodium to 50 g/L arsenic(V) solutions. Both pure O  The comparative results using air rather than pure oxygen oxidation under the same solution conditions are shown in   X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements confirmed that the collected precipitates were all crystalline scorodite. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of the precipitates collected from the reaction solutions with different metal ions are presented in The results of environmental leach tests performed on the precipitates are summarized in Leach tests were conducted on solids according to the procedure specified by the Japanese Environmental Ministry, with these minor modifications: (1) The samples were re-pulped, washed with 10 volumes of distilled water, filtered, and dried. (2) An unbuffered solution of pH 5.1 was prepared using HCl to adjust pH. (3) A 10 g sample and 100 g solution were mixed and placed in a 100 ml polyethylene bag and horizontally shaken for 6 h. (4) The mixture was subjected to 0.45 μm pore membrane filtration and the arsenic content of the filtrate was determined by ICP-MS. The possible amounts of arsenic(V) remaining in the samples due to insufficient single washing were calculated by taking moisture contents into consideration. The calculated values are shown in The results of air oxidation reactions conducted at an initial concentration of 50 g/L As, Fe/As molar ratio 1.5, reaction temperature 95 °C and an initial copper concentration of 0.5 to 20 g/L Cu are illustrated in  No specific changes were observed in the particle size and BET specific surface area of the precipitates in response to an increase in the initial copper concentration. The particle size varied from 10 to 30 μm, and the BET specific surface areas ranged from 0.2 to 0.7 m The results of the leach tests conducted on samples obtained in the presence of different initial copper concentrations are illustrated in     Similar reactions were performed under different pH conditions (adjusted with NaOH) with an initial arsenic concentration of 20 g/L, Fe/As molar ratio 1.5, reaction temperature 95 °C and 40 g/L Na as Na  In this section we discuss the influence of the cations on the scorodite reaction and possible applications of the findings for hydrometallurgical practice. The addition of zinc to the reaction mixture had little effect on scorodite synthesis because the chemical and physical properties of the scorodite product were similar to those obtained without zinc presence. This finding differs from the effect of zinc on hematite synthesis at high temperatures ( The addition of copper to the reaction mixture had no major influence on scorodite precipitation and yielded stable scorodite particles resistant to the leaching test. However, it did result in the following characteristics: (1) decreased pH value, (2) increased ORP level (3) elevated copper and sulfur contents in the scorodite product. This offers the possibility of integrating the scorodite synthesis process into hydrometallurgical copper refining containing up to 70 g/L Cu by properly controlling the decrease in pH. The increase in ORP was probably caused by the catalytic effect of copper on the oxidation rate of ferrous ion with O When 40 g/L Cu was added to the reaction mixture, the copper composition of the scorodite was about 1.9 to 2.35% which represents a significant loss of copper when the scorodite is disposed. It is proposed that copper arsenate [Cu Again, the addition of sodium sulfate to the reaction mixture did not basically interfere with the scorodite synthesis. However, the air oxidation reaction in the presence of sodium yielded less stable scorodite particles from which arsenic leached to a moderate degree. The presence of sodium caused (1) an increase in pH and (2) a decrease in ORP in the reaction mixture. The increase in pH was probably caused by the buffering action of SO The results indicated that arsenic and iron co-precipitated as crystalline scorodite in the presence of 40 g/L Na regardless of the arsenic concentration above 20 g/L. However, the crystals became considerably smaller when the initial arsenic concentration was reduced to 10 g/L and the resulting iron arsenate was partly amorphous. For scorodite synthesis, the following aspects were observed when comparing high and low initial arsenic concentrations: Acidity was elevated due to the presence of H The viscosity of the reaction solution increased. The amount of dissolved oxygen was reduced by the salts, and the degree of oxygen supersaturation was lowered. The post-reaction pH was lowered. The amorphous scorodite formed with 10 g/L As(V) and 40 g/L Na was presumably due to the elevated post-reaction pH level. The remarkably high Na and S content of these precipitates suggests that jarosite may be formed, but XRD failed to detect jarosite peaks. It is very likely an amorphous secondary iron arsenate which is a poorly crystalline structure, including arsenic ferrihydrite ( The addition of NaOH to the reaction system with 20 g/L As(V) hindered the formation of crystalline scorodite. When the initial reaction pH exceeded 2, the resulting precipitates were smaller and were judged from their XRD pattern to be very close to the arsenical ferrihydrite shown by Several researchers have noted that the substitution of SO Since the molar Fe/As ratio of the precipitate was equal to unity, basic iron sulfate was not likely to form in these experiments ( Atmospheric scorodite precipitation reactions were investigated in which ferrous ions were oxidized by pure O Dr. Kazuteru Tozawa, Dr. Kazuo Koike, Dr. Arima and Mr. Aichi are thanked for the helpful discussions and advice.