None of the present magnetic separators is capable of achieving the classification of particles according to their magnetic susceptibility. We have developed a new apparatus to attain these magnetic classification goals. In this paper, the design of the continuous-mode large-scale prototype of the magnetic classifier is presented. Many areas of application are foreseen for this device, and we analyse two of them – health sciences and chemical engineering – presenting also some possible application cases within these areas.Magnetic fields are already commonly applied to achieve the separation or filtration of particles, cells, substances, etc. The most significant classical industries where magnetic fields are used to attain the separation and filtration goals are the minerals processing industries. In the last decade, with the enhancement of magnetic field strength (utilization of superconducting magnets or more powerful permanent magnets) and of magnetic separation capabilities by the indirect use of magnetic tagging and carrier techniques, the spectrum of areas where magnetic separation may be successfully applied has potentially (and in some cases effectively) increased. However, the practical and industrial applications of magnetic separation are still very limited. One of the causes for this limitation is that none of the current industrial magnetic separators is capable of achieving a differential magnetic classification In the last years, we have developed the first worldwide magnetic separator and classifier in order to attain these magnetic classification goals, mainly within the minerals processing area The design of the prototype for the batch-mode of operation has been already presented in The working principles of the new device are described in Medical applications of magnetic separation have left the negligible level a few years ago. This was mainly caused by the development of magnetic carrier and tagging techniques Nowadays, the separation of biologically active compounds and cells may be achieved by two different ways In order for the new device to be successfully applied to this scientific area, some major modifications in its design are foreseen, mainly regarding the trunk configuration, and the different collecting systems. Using the new device (with the design modifications pointed above) will enable us to separate many components on a single step, thus attaining the sorting process depicted in Chemical engineering is a scientific area which contains a broad spectrum of fields. Thus, some of the cases presented in a previous paper The filtration of particles present within aqueous or gaseous media, presenting intrinsically high magnetic susceptibilities, is being achieved since the development of high gradient magnetic filtration (HGMF), decades ago. In fact, there are some typical industries that apply these kind of filters (which rely on the capture of the magnetic particles usually in ferromagnetic matrices, The removal of contaminants present in water, by the application of magnetic fields has been expanding its way, accompanying the development of magnetic tagging and carrier technologies. In fact, the direct removal of some contaminants is only achieved in some special cases when the contaminant already presents a high value of magnetic susceptibility (e.g. removal of iron oxides, removal of calcium to prevent scale), hence other non-magnetic contaminants are only successfully removed after being tagged with magnetic beads or collected/adsorbed by magnetic carriers (see The classification of particles or separation of fluids is often obtained by the utilization of hydrocyclones or cyclones. For many years magnetic systems have been coupled with this devices, in order to try to enhance their performance – by complementing the effect of the centrifugal force with a magnetic force created by a set of permanent magnets, electromagnets ( There are several industrial applications of magnetic separation in recycling. As a classical example we may point out the removal of scrap metals by drum magnetic separators (containing permanent or superconducting magnets). Presently, some other non-conventional applications are emerging, like the waste paper de-inking/recycling process with the aid of wet high intensity magnetic separation ( Fluidized catalytic cracking (FCC) is a commonly used method in the petroleum industry to convert low-value long chain hydrocarbons existent in crude oil into high-value small molecules used in gasoline production It is important to notice that, likewise in health sciences, in all the above pointed cases, only two components, at the most, are separated in one passage, using the majority of the current magnetic devices, and the achievement of multi-separations only occurs, if we use a cascade system of devices or if the feed is passed through the device several times. In order for the new device to be successfully applied to this scientific area, and regarding the cases presented above, major modifications in its design are foreseen, namely concerning the trunk configuration, the feeding systems and the different collecting systems for the (case 3.2.1.4.), and concerning only the trunk configuration and the different collecting systems for the remaining cases. The main advantage of the utilization of the new device (with the design modifications pointed above) in the cases presented, is the achievement of the separation of many components in a single step. Likewise in health sciences, in some particular cases it may be required to use magnetic tagging or carrier technologies. For the cases analysed in this section the main advantages expected are: the removal of contaminants from water, gases or other effluents (cases 3.2.1.1. and 3.2.1.2.) Magnetic Classification, the new area of science created by the new apparatus we have developed, presents many potential applications in a huge spectrum of scientific areas. The continuous-mode large-scale prototype designed to be applied directly to food and mineral processing industries, shown in this paper, differs from the batch-mode model mainly regarding its collecting systems. Concerning the applications of the new device, two major areas were analysed: health sciences and chemical engineering. In what concerns the latter area, cases like water and gas filtration, water treatment, utilization of magnetic hydrocyclones and cyclones, recycling and reaction chemistry, were studied, while in the former area the study was focused regarding the cases of separation and classification of biological compounds or molecules, either presenting intrinsically strong magnetic properties, either requiring the use of magnetic tags or carriers to achieve high enough values for the magnetic susceptibility. In both chemical engineering and health sciences areas the process of analysis was the same (description of the current status of the application of magnetic separators in the case under study, major design modifications required to perform in the new device in order to be successfully applied, and major advantages foreseen resultant of the application of the new apparatus), to conclude that in all cases the possible application of the new apparatus (with the design modifications required) will improve the outcomes. Prof. Domingos Barbosa is acknowledged for all his help regarding this project. Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia is acknowledged for its post-doc sponsorship with reference SFRH/BPD/6964/2001 (P.A. Augusto) and for its sponsorship regarding the participation in the conference solid–liquid separating systems IV. Prof. Fernando Concha is acknowledged for his sponsorship regarding the participation in the conference solid–liquid separating systems IV.