Rice straw samples were exposed to ultrasound-assisted alkaline (NaOH) pretreatment by using the heat energy dissipated from ultrasonication to increase their enzymatic digestibility for saccharification. The characterization shows that the pretreatment could selectively remove lignin and hemicellulose without degrading cellulose, and increase porosity and surface area of rice straw. The porosity, surface area and cellulose content of rice straw increased with the increasing concentration of NaOH used. The rice straw sample pretreated by using the heat energy dissipated from ultrasonication has a higher surface area and a lower crystallinity index value than that pretreated by using the external source of heating, and the amount of reducing sugar released from the former sample at 48h of enzymatic saccharification, which is about 3.5 times as large as that from the untreated rice straw sample (2.91vs. 0.85gL−1), is slightly larger than that from the latter sample (2.91vs. 2.73gL−1). The ultrasound-assisted alkaline pretreatment by using the heat energy dissipated from ultrasonication was proved to be a reliable and effective method for rice straw pretreatment.Recently, ethanol from renewable lignocellulose (cellulosic ethanol) has attracted great attention, largely due to the depletion of fossil fuels, rising fossil fuel prices and environmental concerns ( Although alkaline pretreatment has high delignification efficiency, it is a time-consuming process and requires a large amount of alkali. An appropriate physical or chemical approach is required to intensify the alkaline pretreatment of lignocellulose so as to reduce the consumption of alkali and/or shorten the pretreatment time. Ultrasound, which in liquid media could generate high temperature, pressure and extreme shear forces (known as cavitation effect), has been used for delignification of lignocellulose because the decomposition of water molecules into free radicals by cavitation could aid in cleaving the linkages in lignin and xylan networks and the ultrasound irradiation could cause homolysis of lignin-carbohydrate bonds ( The decomposition of water molecules into free radicals by ultrasound has been proven to be a powerful technique for intensifying reactions and the application of ultrasound to the alkaline pretreatment of lignocellulose has emerged recently. Gogate et al. studied the delignification of lignocellulosic biomass (newspaper) by ultrasound-assisted alkaline pretreatment and found that under the optimal conditions of NaOH concentration of 1 Raw rice straw was collected from a farm in Xiantao, Hubei province, China. Before pretreatment, the raw rice straw was cut to 2–3 Pretreatment was performed in an Erlenmeyer flask (100 The rice straw samples pretreated at NaOH concentrations of 0.4%, 0.6%, 0.8% and 1.0% were denoted as RS-0.4, RS-0.6, RS-0.8 and RS-1.0, respectively. The untreated rice straw and the rice straw pretreated with reaction temperature kept at 50 The pretreatment effectiveness was evaluated by performing the enzymatic saccharification test. 0.5 The cellulose, hemicellulose and acid-insoluble lignin content in the rice straw sample was determined by the Van Soest method ( The morphological changes induced by pretreatment were examined by SEM to obtain insight into the structure modification in rice straw, and the results are shown in Compositional changes of rice straw after pretreatment were determined by the Van Soest method, and the results are shown in To further investigate the effect of pretreatment on the physicochemical properties of rice straw, the specific surface area and pore volume of rice straw samples, which are consider to be crucial factors affecting the enzymatic hydrolysis of lignocellulosic materials ( Crystallinity of lignocellulose has been recognized as one of the major substrate properties determining hydrolysis rate (  Traditionally, the purpose of lignocellulose pretreatment is to remove lignin and hemicellulose, and to increase the porosity and surface area, thus improving its saccharification efficiency ( Rice straw samples were exposed to ultrasound-assisted alkaline pretreatment by using the heat energy dissipated from ultrasonication. The characterization shows that the pretreatment could selectively remove lignin and hemicellulose without degrading cellulose, and increase porosity and surface area, resulting in enhanced enzymatic hydrolysis. With the increasing concentration of NaOH used, the enzymatic hydrolysis efficiency of rice straw was increased due to the higher porosity and surface area and higher extent of hemicellulose and lignin removal. Compared with the rice straw sample pretreated by using the external source of heating, the rice straw sample pretreated by using the heat energy dissipated from ultrasonication has a high surface area and a low crystallinity index value, which results in a higher enzymatic digestibility and a higher yield of reducing sugar. The ultrasound-assisted alkaline pretreatment by using the heat energy dissipated from ultrasonication was proved to be a reliable and effective method for rice straw pretreatment. The present study was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 