Modelling and simulation has gained a high importance in the field of process engineering over recent years. As the processing technology of solid waste materials becomes more complex due to the growing requirements on the products, the need for computerised simulation technologies in this area of engineering is evident. The task that derives from the heterogeneity of the waste material to be described is vectorisation of the material flow. In order to have a cluster of parameters which is capable of describing the characteristics of the material flow, the waste material has to be categorised and structured in accordance with the key processes which are used to process the material flow. To guarantee a satisfactory material description, advanced analytical concepts have to be applied to the samples taken for characterisation. As an example, the grain-size-specific water content is analysed and implemented in the model library used for the simulation. The simulation results indicate that the advanced material characterisation is more efficient than the ordinary one.lower calorific value (kJ/kg) correction factor for the adaptation of the grain-size-specific water content (–) Kreislaufwirtschafts- und Abfallgesetz German legislation on sustainable development and waste management mass of the grain size class interpolated value on the basis of the mean grain size class vector of the material fraction water content of the material fraction water content of the material fraction water content of the grain size class water content of the grain size class In the field of secondary material treatment a wide variety of technologies has been established which are used for the processing of different kinds of waste materials. In addition to that, the material-flow-specific treatment according to the KrW/AbfG (German legislation on sustainable development and waste management) is demanding more and more sophisticated technologies, which complicate the planning and the operation of processing plants for secondary materials. Despite the existing knowledge and experience regarding individual processing steps, each secondary material processing plant has to undergo a long phase of trial runs due to the lack of a method for linking and transferring the specific knowledge to a self-contained concept. The cause for this shortcoming is, on the one hand, the lack of experimental operation of the specific technology which would allow a prediction of the efficiency. On the other hand the reason is the strong heterogeneity of secondary materials for which a diction is used which is often orientated at the individual process units and the kind of material flow description they demand. Resulting from this, a material flow description is necessary, which is formulated independently from individual processing steps and is suitable for the whole variety of elementary processing technologies. On the basis of the method of vectorisation for a secondary material flow introduced in this context it is possible to develop models of the individual processing steps, which can communicate with each other and offer potential for the planning and computer-based operation of secondary material processing plants. In the field of waste processing there previously did not exist any model library or software for simulation which enables the user to model and simulate the basic processes of secondary material processing. The existing model libraries and simulation programs known in mineral processing and manufacturing technology are not suitable for usage in secondary material processing because of the used material flow and process description. In addition to this, the biological reactive potential of the usual secondary material streams is not taken into account. As a result of this shortcoming the model library-based simulation software SimuRec (SIMUlation of solid waste material processing and RECycling) has been created. The benefit from a model library specialising in the field of solid waste material processing is evident. Using a computerised plant layout which takes account of the special characteristics of the secondary material flow, the cost-extensive period of a plant’s putting into service and check-up time is reduced drastically. This benefit derives from a model-based process dimensioning which can predict the possibility of attaining the contractually agreed characteristics of a plant concept. In addition to this, it is possible to analyse the underlying concept of a plant which is already in operation regarding possible modifications of the plant’s basic concept, using a calculator-based model as the tool for this examination. The main aspect of this publication is the introduction of the underlying concept of the advanced material flow description used within the model library. The most problematic aspect that goes along with the description of a secondary material flow to be used within a simulation of a waste processing plant is the complexity of its composition and its heterogeneity. Since the first attempts to describe waste materials for the calculation of treatment processes in the 1970s, hand sorting according to material fractions has been established. The underlying idea of this concept is that the material characteristics of the individual different material fractions can be described easily compared with the description of the whole material flow and also can be verified by values derived from secondary literature. During recent years a huge variety of secondary material processing plants has been examined by the Chair for Processing and Recycling of Secondary Waste Materials. The aim of these examinations was to obtain information on the material flow balance of whole plant concepts in order to optimise the process functionality i.e. recovery and content. The tool used for these measures of optimisation is simulation according to the model library which has been developed. When analysing the material fractions’ characteristics, the need to analyse the grain size distribution of every material fraction became obvious. Together with the other relevant parameters needed for a process-related material flow description, the following vector is stated for every individual material fraction ( As the material fraction catalogue used for the material flow description contains 10 different material fractions, a total number of 190 parameters is needed for the formulation of the material flow vector. The vector introduced in this context is a further development of the one stated in earlier publications (  An influence associated with the grain size distribution is the grain-size-specific distribution of the water content. It has been estimated that smaller grain sizes of secondary materials possess a higher water content than larger grain sizes because of their higher specific surface. To quantify this influence, a sample of 2 Each of these material fractions was divided into five grain size classes. For each grain size class of every material fraction the water content was analysed. The best example for the influence of the specific surface of the individual material fractions on the grain-size-specific water content is the distribution of the plastic foil specific water content. The strongest influence regarding the parameters of product quality which are considered in this context can be recognised when regarding the lower calorific value. To be precise, the influence of the grain-size-specific water content was obvious when verifying the first simulation results. On the assumption of a constant gross calorific value for the whole material flow throughout all grain size classes, the lower calorific value distribution shown in Based upon the relative grain-size-specific water content for every material fraction, calculation of the water content of each grain size class is done by the following steps: Calculation of the grain-size-specific water content Calculation of the water content Calculation of the correction factor Calculation of the new absolute water content values This kind of recalculation ensures that the user of the simulation software can edit the material-fraction-specific water content and the material-fraction-specific grain size distribution. On the other hand the influence of the relative grain-size-specific water content is preserved. Implementation in the model takes place during the matrix generation. The correction factors Another aspect which has to be taken into account when vectoring a waste material flow is the material-fraction-specific hydrogen content, which is needed for the calculation of the lower calorific value. The influence explained above has been implemented into the model library and the vector generation.  Using a specific model library for the simulation of solid waste materials processing, the plant layout, as well as prognosis of product qualities can be carried out in a simple and sophisticated way. None the less, the strong influence of the material flow characterisation on the simulation results has to be taken into account. Based on the material fraction distribution a precise description of the material flow can be made which would not be this reliable if based upon samples of the whole material flow. Each material fraction is divided into five grain size classes that have similar characteristics as they belong to the same material fractions. Due to their origin and their specific surface they possess slightly different parameter qualities. This differentiation is taken into account by the setup of an advanced material characterisation which incorporates grain-size-specific aspects. As an example, the grain-size-specific water content as well as the material-fraction-specific hydrogen content is implemented in the model library. In accordance with this, simulation runs are carried out to point out the difference between the conventional vectorisation and the advanced material flow characterisation. A task for the developer of a simulation model is to keep in mind the rapid changes in waste material composition caused by legislative changes and by changing consumption habits. For example, the introduction of a compulsory deposit fee for several beverage cans and bottles and the rapidly increasing use of PET-bottles has a strong influence on the specific composition of household residues. The reason for the presence of a specific material fraction in the characterising vector is the quantity of the material fraction or the relevance for the product quality. In forthcoming balancing analytics it is necessary to quantify more grain-size-specific contents of relevant quality parameters for each material fraction in order to achieve an advanced computerised plant layout. Using a sophisticated material description and the simulation model introduced above, it is possible to meet the high standards and required recycling rates of current waste management plans by modelling the projected processing plant in advance, as well as to enhance the performance of existing plans. The model library including the material flow description has been used for different tasks. One was to predict the maximum recovery and content of utilisable secondary derived fuels in household waste materials which had to be processed in a municipal waste processing plant in Trier/Germany.