Hydrogen (H2) gas is seen as an ideal future energy carrier because it is easily converted into electricity in fuel cells, liberates a large amount of energy per unit mass, and generates no air pollutants. In this work, biological hydrogen (bioH2) was produced from the microalgal biomass of Scenedesmus obliquus which was used as a substrate for the fermentation by Enterobacter aerogenes ATCC 13048 and Clostridium butyricum DSM 10702. The bioH2 produced by each strain was assessed for different S. obliquus biomass concentrations, using both dried (5% moisture) and “wet” (69% moisture) biomass. The highest bioH2 production yields obtained were 57.6mLH2/g VSalga from 2.5galga/L by E. aerogenes and 113.1mLH2/g VSalga from 50.0galga/L by C. butyricum. The bioH2 production rates, and biogas purity attained by using the wet biomass as a fermentation substrate were similar or higher than those obtained with the dried microalga. This means that the drying step is not needed and therefore saves considerable energy as this is one of the highest energy demanding stages when using this feedstock in fermentations for biofuels production.Renewable, sustainable and carbon–neutral energy production is needed to fulfil the growing energy demand and consequential climate changes. Hydrogen (H H In recent years, bioH Microalgal biomass can be used as an interesting alternative substrate for bioH The main objective of this work was to evaluate and compare the bioH The microalga used in this work was For the recovery of the microalgal biomass from the raceway ponds, the agitation was stopped and the biomass settled down. Most of the liquid phase was poured out and the collected biomass was submitted to subsequent centrifugation (10,000 The microalgal biomass was characterised in terms of its chemical composition, according to the A.O.A.C. The total sugar content was evaluated by the phenol–sulphuric method The fermentations were performed by two bacterial strains: Batch fermentation assays were performed in 120 The effect of the substrate concentration was studied by using different concentrations of the microalgal biomass, ranging from 2.5 All the experiments were performed in triplicate and the results are expressed as average The gaseous phase samples were collected directly from the headspace of the serum bottles by using a gas-tight syringe. The H The hydrogen production yields (mL The supernatants of the fermentation trials, obtained by centrifugation (15000 The chemical composition of the dried alga is presented in The percentage of water was residual in the dried biomass (5.4%, The effect of the initial substrate (microalga) concentration on hydrogen production was studied in the fermentations by For both bacteria, the bioH The highest hydrogen production attained by In terms of soluble metabolite production, in the case of In order to reduce the energy used for bioH There were no significant differences in the H To our knowledge, there is only one study reporting the use of wet biomass from microalgae/cyanobacteria for bioH The optimal bioH  In general, the present results are significantly higher than the ones obtained by other authors in the fermentation of microalgal biomass, especially for  The best results attained by Cheng and co-workers The fermentation by pure cultures can also be an advantage over the use of microbial consortia, since even after inocula pre-treatment In previous studies carried out by the authors The results obtained in this work demonstrate the potential of the This research was part of