We studied the frictional behaviour and deformation products of large (20 cm × 20 cm bare surfaces) experimental limestone faults. We sheared samples in a direct shear configuration, with an imposed normal force of 40–200 kN and shear velocity of 10 μm/s. The steady-state shearing of these surfaces yielded a coefficient of friction 0.7<μ<1 (average μ∼0.9), significantly higher than gouge friction of the same material, μ∼0.6. Frictional healing, studied via slide-hold-slide tests, is null (Δμ≤0 upon re-shear). Moreover, sliding of these surfaces is accompanied by dilatation and production of grooves, gouge striations and fault mirrors. These products are entirely analogous to slip surface phenomena found on natural limestone-bearing faults at both the macroscale and at the microscale. We infer that high friction, accompanied by dilatant deformation, and null frictional healing are the macroscopic effect of brittle damage on the sliding surface, constrained by the strength of the rock and by fast healing processes in the gouge. Simultaneously to brittle failure, plastic deformation occurs on the sliding surface and inside the intact rock via nanoparticle formation (mirrors) and twinning at the micron scale. Because of the similarity between experimental and natural structures, we suggest that sliding of carbonate-bearing faults in the uppermost crust could be characterized by high friction, fast healing and strongly dilatant deformation, which would help to explain shallow seismicity frequently documented in carbonatic terrains such as the Northern Apennines of Italy.In the uppermost crust, most of the displacement between rock masses is accommodated by brittle faults. The inner structure of fault zones can be complex as it is the result of complex geological histories and processes (e.g. It is commonly assumed that the PSZ accommodate coseismic sliding ( In the field, PSZ are characterized by various slip surface phenomena (e.g. The small thickness of typical PSZ, typically ranging from a few cm to a few microns (e.g. To study the deformation of PSZ at different laboratory scales and to better understand the slip behaviour of carbonate-bearing faults, we performed biaxial experiments on limestone PSZ. We link the frictional properties with deformation mechanisms during slip and compare them with field observations. We performed direct shear experiments on large (20 cm × 20 cm) limestone bare surfaces simulating smooth carbonate PSZ surrounded by cemented fault rocks. With this experimental design, we are able to reproduce typical phenomena that affect PSZ such as grooves (toolmarks), fault mirrors and localized gouge formation. For comparison with previous experimental work and to test the reliability of our setup, we also performed experiments on standard synthetic fault gouge of the same limestone. Carbonates frequently host intense seismicity (e.g. Field observations in competent limestone formations show that PSZ of large faults (e.g. Moreover, unaltered carbonatic PSZ are frequently highly reflective (“fault mirrors”, e.g. To study the friction of limestone surfaces at different laboratory scales, we designed sliding friction experiments in a “single direct” configuration ( Experiments were performed using the BRAVA biaxial apparatus (INGV Rome, During each test on bare surfaces, normal force was kept constant during sliding, in the range 40–200 kN. These values are equivalent to ∼1–5 MPa nominal normal stress on the surfaces, but are considered only as a reference value for the experiment given the uneven distribution of stress on the block surfaces. This uneven stress distribution is likely due to roughness and the progressive stress concentration on small patches while sliding (see section Initially, at slip distance values < 10 mm and usually less than 5 mm, the blocks show a non-linear slip hardening behaviour, which is attributed to a combination of adjustment of the sample assembly, the elastic loading of the limestone blocks, the yielding and unsteady sliding of the slip surfaces. After the initial phase, after a steady-state friction was reached, sliding velocity was varied in velocity-stepping sequences (not illustrated in the present study) and finally toggled for slide-hold-slide tests (SHS, e.g. In addition, we performed sliding experiments on synthetic fault gouge obtained from the same Maljat After the experiments, we performed a visual inspection of the sheared surfaces/gouges. Moreover, to study slip surface phenomena and to estimate the real contact area of the blocks at the end of the experiment, most sliding surfaces were subject to high-resolution optical scanning (Epson PerfectionV300 scanner, 1200–2400 dpi). Scans were performed both before and after the experiment ( The sliding of the 20 × 20 cm bare surfaces is always associated with dilatation of the surfaces (  The large bare surfaces have systematically high values of steady-state friction between 0.7<μ<1 (average μ∼0.9) and are generally independent from the initial roughness and imposed normal force acting on the blocks ( Frictional healing results, illustrated in The macroscopic deformation structures observed on the 20 cm × 20 cm experimental surfaces were very similar at the end of each experiment, despite differences in sliding histories. The surfaces at the end of the experiments were always characterized by the presence of patches of wear material elongated in the direction of slip ( The length of isolated grooves and gouge patches typically ranges from a fraction of a millimeter to the length of total displacement imposed during the experiment (10–50 mm, When the gouge is removed, the grooves have an elongated shape and show semi-circular en-enchelon cracks, in which the convexity is opposite to the sense of shear ( In cross section, the grooves show ridges of cohesive rock and en echelon arrays of tensional open fractures dipping towards the leading edge of the groove, consistent with the shear sense ( The attrition gouge produced in our experiments is slightly cohesive and has angular, heterometric clasts ( Secondary electron SEM investigation of the sliding surfaces revealed that the slip surfaces at the top of the gouge patches (Y shears) are covered by a very fine grained material with micron and sub-micron scale striations ( In the following section, we integrate mechanical data with microstructural investigations collected along carbonatic slip zones to discuss: a) the role of deformation processes and stress concentration on frictional strength; 2) the effect of fracturing and fault gouge development on frictional healing; 3) the development of plastic deformation along mirror-like slip surfaces; and d) faulting processes in carbonates. Our experiments show that the frictional strength of carbonatic PSZ can be highly variable, ranging from the strength of the gouge (μ∼0.6) to the strength of cohesive slip surfaces (μ∼0.9–1), depending on the deformation processes, stress heterogeneity and slip history along the surfaces. In particular, our experiments carried out on larger samples allowed us to observe that during sliding on bare surfaces, deformation is typically dilatant ( These observations have two main implications: 1) that high friction of bare surfaces is due to an excess energy needed to create penetrative brittle damage (“off-fault” damage) in the sliding surface where force concentrates ( Experiments with large sliding blocks and synthetic gouges therefore represent two end-members of the friction and deformation processes along carbonate faults: 1) sliding on a cemented slip zone on which roughness imposes heterogeneous stress concentration and 2) sliding in zones with smooth stress distribution within an incohesive gouge layer. In the case of cemented slip zones, the force concentrates at sites of small topographic irregularities, and the stress exceeded the brittle strength of the surface, producing the grooves and the associated gouge. At the tip and within the grooves, the stress field imposed by the topographic asperities and by the structure of the gouge is likely to be complex (e.g. The brittle processes occurring in our experiments are therefore qualitatively analogous to the abrasion process in ceramics (e.g. Grooving and fault gouge development, captured by experiments on large bare surfaces and associated with higher friction and dilatant faults, also influences the frictional healing behaviour. In fact, the healing behaviour of large surfaces differs dramatically from that of calcite-based gouges ( Whereas brittle failure is evident at the cm/mm scale and controls the macroscopic sliding strength, at small scales (μm), deformation is characterized by the occurrence of plastic deformation. The mirrors found on both the block surfaces and the gouge ( Nanoparticles that form mirror-like slip surfaces in our experiments are morphologically very similar to those produced in numerous rotary shear experiments (e.g. The experiments we conducted in large bare surfaces, with displacements in the range of 1–5 cm and a velocity of ∼10 μm/s, can be considered representative of: 1) slip along an immature fault that due to the low displacement results in low gouge production, or 2) the pre-seismic phases of slip along a mature fault that experienced extensive consolidation and cementation of the fault rocks, i.e. fault healing. Shearing on “large” slip surfaces during our experiments reproduces a variety of phenomena typically observed on mature faults, including gouge production, striations, mirrors and fractures (e.g. Striations on healed fault planes are a characteristic of many faults exhumed from the uppermost crust, suggesting that, like in our experiments, large stress concentration and stress heterogeneities may occur. These concentrations arise from motion over or across asperities in the fault topography and lead to failure of the fault rock, formation of wear products and dilatation occurring in releasing bends ( The condition of high friction and dilatation along the fault plane should continue as long as the motion stops, a continuous layer of gouge covers the fault patch, or dynamic weakening occurs (e.g. We also suggest that these fault properties may favour earthquake slip in carbonates in the uppermost crust. In the Northern Apennines of Italy there are many examples of carbonate-bearing normal faults, considered exhumed analogues of seismogenic faults at depth: e.g. the Gubbio fault ( In principle, high fault strength and high healing rates would favour unstable fault slip and earthquake nucleation as they promote the accumulation of elastic strain energy in the crust (e.g. We performed slow friction experiments using a new biaxial apparatus, shearing 20 × 20 cm bare surfaces of limestone, and performed microstructural analysis to study the mechanics of incipient slip on large scale, cohesive fault planes in carbonates. Friction of these large surfaces is higher (μ∼0.9) than the friction of limestone powders (μ∼0.6), due to the additional fracture energy that is necessary to produce grooves and wear material during the sliding. Concurrently, frictional healing in our tests shows a complex behaviour, which coupled with structural/microstructural analyses, suggests fast fault healing and effective cementation of the Principal Slip Zones. Our experiments produce striations, tensional fractures, gouge and fault mirrors identical to those found in natural carbonate-bearing faults. We also documented that plastic and brittle deformation processes can occur simultaneously during slip at sub-seismic rates: twinning and shiny surfaces coated with nanoparticles at small (μm) scales and pervasive brittle deformation and wear at a larger (mm) scale. We envision that carbonate-bearing faults in the uppermost crust can be very strong due to a combination of low effective stress and high healing rates of the fault gouge. In principle these properties may imply favourable conditions for earthquake generation and contribute to explaining the large occurrence of earthquakes hosted on carbonates at shallow crustal levels. The Authors thank M. Nazzari ad D. Mannetta, for assistance with the SEM and high quality thin section preparation, respectively. Alfonso Tini (Mondial Marmi s.r.l.) is warmly acknowledged for providing the Maljat The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at