This work concerns a systematic study investigating the effect on microstructure, porosity and bending strength of the addition of small amounts of very fine sol–gel derived nanoalumina on a micron-sized alumina powder for the production of highly porous ceramics. Different ways of mixing, with the nanomaterial being either in powder form (γ-alumina) or in sol state (boehmite sol), were investigated for this purpose. It was observed that when small amounts of nanomaterial (4–6wt%) are added both the bending strength and open porosity increase to a level depending significantly on mixing method and level of dispersion of nanoparticles into the coarse matrix. The increase in strength can reach 100% in case the nanomaterial is added in powder form and 500% in case of mixing in sol state.Porous ceramics have attracted significant attention because of their successful use in a broad range of high value applications including filters, electronic sensors, catalysts, construction materials, etc. For most of these applications the ceramic materials need to fulfill some specific requirements regarding their microstructure, porosity, permeability, mechanical properties, etc. The main drawback of porous ceramics, however, is the low mechanical properties as a result of their high porosity. In order to substantially increase the strength keeping high porosity, very promising approaches are the mixing of materials with different particle size distributions and the addition of nanoparticles. The addition of aluminum hydroxide to the starting alumina powder has been also suggested in literature as a means of improving the mechanical properties (fracture toughness and bending strength) of the final porous ceramics. Furthermore, other researchers The main problems arising when a nanopowder is mixed with a micron-sized powder are related with the difficult dispersion of nanoparticles into the coarse matrix and the presence of strong agglomerates that substantially degrade the mechanical properties of final ceramics. Although there are a lot of studies investigating the production and the properties of porous ceramics with nanoparticles, the core–shell approach has been very little investigated up to now as a method to coat coarse alumina with small quantities of boehmite for developing porous ceramics. Furthermore, a comparative analysis describing the influence of different ways of mixing with the nanomaterial, in combination with the sintering conditions, on the porosity, microstructure and flexural strength is missing. In the present study different ways of mixing low amounts of very fine sol–gel derived alumina nanoparticles with a micron-sized commercial alumina were investigated for the production of ceramics with high open porosity and increased strength. The nanomaterial was added either in powder form (γ-alumina) or in the sol state (boehmite sol) to exploit the core–shell approach. Porous alumina samples were developed by employing a commercial α-Al Exactly the same procedure was adopted to produce porous samples starting from mixtures of the commercial α-Al Two different approaches were investigated in this case: mixing of the coarse powder with the nanomaterial either in powder form (γ-alumina) or in the sol state (boehmite sol). In all the cases studied, the percentage of nanoparticles added in the mixture was varied in the range 2–20 In the first approach, sol–gel Al The resulting nanopowder was either directly added in the shear mixer along with the commercial alumina powder and the rest of the materials (surfactant, binder, water) or it was firstly mixed with the commercial powder following a ball milling procedure to achieve a better dispersion of the nanopowder. In the latter case, the mixture of nano and commercial powder was dispersed in water (80 In the second approach, the mixing of the nanomaterial with the conventional powder was made in the sol state. In this case, the same conditions as described above were employed for the sol–gel synthesis, however the hydrolysis was carried out in a very high water excess (molar ratio of the reactants: Al(NO The open porosity and the pore size distribution of the sintered ceramics were measured by mercury porosimetry (Micromeritics Autopore IV 9400). To assume experimental reproducibility and the error of the method six of the developed ceramics, with open porosities spanned in the whole range of measured porosities, were additionally tested by performing analysis on at least five samples per case. The standard deviation in all the cases was less than 5% of the respective mean open porosity value in line with Andreola et al.  Despite the porosity increase, the addition of nanoparticles results also in the increase of bending strength ( These results are consistent with Li et al.  These effects on microstructure and the high diffusion kinetics of nanoparticles can explain the trend on porosity and bending strength curves of This would ideally occur in case that a complete coverage of surface of the coarse alumina particles by the nanograins could be achieved. However, as the nanomaterial percentage continues increasing above the threshold value, which was measured at around 8 This trend in porosity is also reflected on bending strength, which after its initial increase starts decreasing slowly with the further porosity increase presenting a local maximum. The already mentioned increased inhomogeneity with the nanomaterial content due to strong agglomeration of nanopowder can also affect the further strength rise. Deng et al. The behaviour of the powder mixtures during sintering was also investigated through dilatometric studies. The results confirmed the assumption of faster kinetics during the initial sintering stages. In  However, although there is a considerable increase of porosity, the bending strength is increasing too reaching very high values. For both mixing procedures (with or without the addition of the spray drying step) the increase of strength is of the order of 400–500%. This is consistent with Kwon and Messing In The very good nanomaterial dispersion achieved through the spray drying step is reflected on the sintering behaviour of samples. The respective samples exhibit very fast sintering kinetics in the early stages of sintering and this is depicted in the shrinkage curves obtained in the dilatometer ( The faster kinetics observed here come as a result of better packing and more uniform dispersion of the nanomaterial when mixed in the sol-state, since in this case the coarse alumina is coated with the boehmite sol developing a core–shell structure. The consequence of this behaviour is the final porosity evolution already discussed in Section The densification kinetics in the case of mixing in the sol state but without being followed by spray drying, are slower resulting in higher porosity values at 1500 The difference in behaviour between the samples prepared with and without spray drying can be attributed to the better particle packing in case of spray drying. This has as an effect the parallel shift of the whole porosity curve obtained after sintering at 1500 Porous ceramics were fabricated from powder mixtures of a micron-sized alumina powder with small amounts (2–20 It was shown that the addition of small amounts of nanomaterial (4–6