This retrospective study evaluated different pinning configurations used in the treatment of displaced supracondylar humeral fractures among children, mainly regarding maintenance of fracture reduction and avoidance of complications. The fractures (41 type II and 67 type III) of 108 children (mean age 6.48 years) were treated by closed reduction and percutaneous pinning: 37 with crossed pins, 37 with two lateral pins and 34 with two lateral and one medial pin. Mean follow-up period was 7.4 months. Type III fractures fixed by two lateral pins were found significantly prone to postoperative instability, late complications and need for medial pin fixation. There was a significant relation between either delay to surgery or postoperative instability and occurrence of complications. Final outcome was significantly poorer in type III than in type II fractures. Fixation by two lateral pins only is not recommended for treating type III supracondylar humeral fractures, but could be used initially to fix severely unstable fractures to allow extension of the elbow before inserting a medial pin. Every effort should be made to avoid iatrogenic ulnar nerve injury while inserting the medial pin.Closed reduction with percutaneous pin fixation has become the treatment of choice for displaced supracondylar fractures of the humerus in children. Successful management involves avoiding early ulnar nerve injury, redisplacement and late malunion complications. At our institution, we have uniformly treated children with displaced supracondylar humeral fractures by closed reduction and pinning. The rare fractures that were irreducible were treated with open reduction and pinning. Pin placement has been left to the judgement of the treating surgeon. The aim of this retrospective study was to review over a period of 5 years all children with displaced supracondylar fractures of the humerus treated by closed reduction and percutaneous pinning, and to evaluate and compare the results of different pinning configurations in maintaining fracture reduction and avoiding possible early and late complications. We retrospectively reviewed all children with Gartland types II and III supracondylar distal humeral fractures treated at our institution by closed reduction and percutaneous pinning between January 2001 and December 2005. Exclusion criteria were open fractures, fractures that required open reduction, neurological or vascular injuries found on presentation, previous ipsilateral elbow fracture, presence of any concomitant fractures in the ipsilateral limb and loss to follow-up. We reviewed the hospital records of the study cohort in detail, including personal data, preoperative clinical examinations, time from injury to surgery, operative notes, postoperative evaluations, duration of immobilisation, time of pin removal, presence of complications, need for further surgery and clinical assessment at final follow-up visit. Preoperative, intraoperative and early postoperative radiographs were examined to determine fracture type, accuracy of reduction, pin configuration, Baumann's angle, humerocapitellar angle and lateral rotational percentage (the percentage of displacement of the proximal humeral metaphysis at the fracture site in relation to the width of the distal humerus just distal to the fracture site as measured on the lateral radiograph). A total of 108 children fulfilled the inclusion criteria of the study, including 61 boys and 47 girls. Their mean age was 6.48 All the children underwent general anaesthesia, closed reduction and percutaneous pinning. The surgeon selected the pin size to be used according to the age of the child and the size of the arm (usually 1.6 The children were discharged home when comfortable (usually after 1–2 days) and were seen in the clinic 1 week after surgery. Radiographs were obtained in both anteroposterior and lateral planes. If these were acceptable, the child was seen again after 3 weeks, when the cast was removed and more radiographs obtained. When acceptable healing was confirmed, the pins were removed in the clinic and motion was encouraged. The mean immobilisation time in the present study was 5.1 Follow-up continued until full range of motion was regained. Some children had prolonged follow-up because of a postoperative complication or residual deformity. The mean follow-up period was 7.4 (5–36) months. The clinical and radiological assessments were reviewed at the final visit. Clinical assessment included range of motion, carrying angle, neurological and vascular examination, return to full function and need for reoperation. Radiological assessment was made by comparing Baumann's angle in the initial postoperative and final follow-up radiographs. A change in Baumann's angle of more than12° was defined as a major loss of reduction; a change from 6° to 12°as mild displacement; and a change of less than 6° as no displacement. Closed reduction and pinning was performed within 8 Intraoperative radiographs showed that the fracture reduction was acceptable in all cases. Significant instability due to inadequate fixation, and early loss of reduction of different degrees and in different planes, were observed in postoperative radiographs of nine children who underwent fixation by two lateral pins (eight had type III fractures and one had a type II fracture) as shown in Final clinical and radiological assessment confirmed complete healing of the fractures in all the children, without neurological or vascular compromise. All regained full range of motion, except for one boy who lost approximately 20° of elbow flexion and had an extension lag of <10°, and one girl who also had an extension lag of <10°. Among the nine children who showed loss of reduction in early postoperative radiographs, one had a minor residual deformity (obliteration of the carrying angle) and three had an evident cubitus varus deformity that justified corrective osteotomy ( Statistical analysis of our results showed that girls are more likely than boys to sustain a supracondylar humeral fracture in the preschool period ( The successful treatment of displaced supracondylar humeral fractures in children depends on achieving and maintaining an acceptable reduction until the fracture is healed, while avoiding complications. Controversy persists regarding the optimal pin fixation technique. According to clinical data, the use of two lateral pins placed in either a parallel or a divergent pattern (the latter being more biomechanically stable) provides adequate biomechanical stability with minimal risk of ulnar nerve injury, and is therefore gaining in popularity. Type II fractures are distinguished by the presence of intact bone or periosteum posteriorly at the fracture site, preventing loss of rotational alignment. Type III fractures, however, lack this inherent stability and the comminution of the medial cortex, which is usually present in a type III fracture, adds more instability. Even a small degree of malrotation of the fragments can cause marked tilting in anteroposterior alignment, allowing cubitus varus deformity to develop, and this usually requires corrective surgery at a later date to improve elbow function. Our clinical results supported this observation. Of 23 type II fractures fixed in our study primarily with two lateral pins, 3 showed intraoperative instability that required an additional medial pin and 1 showed postoperative instability with posterior tilting that remodelled without sequelae. However, of the 48 type III fractures fixed primarily with two lateral pins, 31 showed intraoperative instability that warranted an additional medial pin. Of the 17 fractures fixed by lateral pins alone, 8 demonstrated significant postoperative instability and 4 of these developed cubitus varus deformity. Although the use of a medial pin is known for its association with ulnar nerve injury, it is interesting to note that, when examining the overall probability of iatrogenic nerve injury, there is still a 2% probability of radial or anterior interosseous nerve damage associated with lateral entry pin fixation. The incidence of reported iatrogenic ulnar nerve lesions caused by a medial pin ranges from 1.4% to 15.6%. Measures taken to avoid iatrogenic ulnar nerve damage while inserting a medial pin include relative extension of the elbow with a maximum of 60° flexion, after inserting the lateral pin. This should reduce possible ulnar nerve subluxation before inserting the medial pin. In very unstable fractures, a second lateral pin may be needed to provide more stability before partially extending the elbow for safe medial pin placement. If the ulnar nerve and groove cannot be identified with confidence, a small incision should be made over the pin insertion site and blunt dissection should be performed down to the bone, to place the pin under direct vision. Its retrospective nature is the main weak point of the current study. Another weak point is the lack of standard protocol, in that pin configuration was left to the choice of the surgeon. However, the investigation was strengthened by the large number of cases included with fully detailed preoperative, operative and postoperative data. Furthermore, there was no surgeon bias towards specific pin configuration; choice was based on testing intraoperative stability and severity of the elbow swelling. The authors noted that precise lateral pin placement, which is stressed by advocators of the lateral pin configuration, is often difficult to achieve In conclusion, our results suggest that fixation with two lateral pins is suitable for type II supracondylar humeral fractures, but does not provide enough stability in most type III fractures to avoid redisplacement. Therefore, the authors do not recommend lateral pinning in treating type III supracondylar humeral fractures in children. In severely unstable fractures, two lateral pins could be used initially to allow extension of the elbow before inserting the medial pin. In doubtful cases with a massively swollen elbow, a small incision can save the ulnar nerve from injury. We thank the consultants at our institution who allowed us to include their cases in the study. We also thank Amir Marzouk and Roqaya Zamzam for their help in statistical analysis of the data and preparation of the manuscript.