The principal factors, which limit the rate and selectivity of flotation recovery of fine particles from water (microflotation), are discussed in terms of kinetic approach. It is shown both theoretically and experimentally that the efficiency of microflotation can be improved significantly over that of the conventional technologies by way of the hydrodynamic treatment of multi-phase mixture (water/particles/microbubbles) in the turbulent flow. The main principles of ‘turbulent microflotation’ are formulated and the parameters are defined, which are responsible for high efficiency of the recovery, which are, (1) pre-aggregation (coagulation, flocculation) of particles to reach aggregate size of D
                     p>7 μm; (2) utilisation of microbubbles of the initial dimensions d
                     b<40 μm; (3) maintaining the microbubbles aggregation (coalescence) effectiveness α
                     b<0.03. Experimental runs on the pilot plant prove the validity of the proposed theory of the turbulent microflotation.For over 100 years flotation has been known as the method for mineral raw material and wastewater treatment. And exactly for the same period of time the issue of flotation of fine particles, or so-called ‘slims problem’, has been on the agenda In line with the principles of the above mentioned theory the capture efficiency of small low inertia particles by the rising bubble Taking into account that in first approach As it is well known the kinetics of flotation recovery of non-aggregating particles in a flotation cell can be described by the equation of the first order reaction On the basis of The increased bubbling rate On the basis of Thorough theoretical studies show that even when the size of bubbles As it follows from But why is it, that with the decrease of the size of particles not only the flotation recovery drops but also the selectivity decreases? The theoretic substantiation of these phenomena is given in As it follows from As it follows from the above, the recovery (including selective recovery) of fine particles from water either in disperse or aggregated state by flotation requires the use of small bubbles with the diameter at least below 100 μm. In this case the major factor, which limits the process rate, is the slow rising velocity of bubbles loaded with particles. Dramatic increase (by more than the order of magnitude) in microflotation rate can be achieved by performing coagulation (flocculation) and heterocoagulation of multiple phase disperse systems in the turbulent flow. The concept of this method, firstly described in Practical applications based on this principles have been developed independently in The major sub-processes, on which microflotation is based and which have to be considered in engineering design works for wastewater purification from fine contaminants and mineral raw materials treatment, are described in details below. As it has been described above, the turbulent microflotation is based on the principle of separating in space and partially time four major sub-processes, (1) coagulation (flocculation) of flotated particles; (2) heterocoagulation of aggregated particles and bubbles; (3) aggregation ( and partial coalescence) of bubbles loaded with particles into foam aggregates; (4) separation of foam aggregates from water by sedimentation. For high concentrations of particles (i.e. above 0.5 g l It is clear that in order to maintain the above described processes and also to prevent early separation of the treated multi-phase mixture, the latter should be subjected to the specific hydrodynamic treatment in the static and/or dynamic mixers. The long tube appears to be the most suitable form for a static mixer, and inside it the turbulent flow regime of required intensity could be maintained. By way of passing the treated mixture along this tube it is also possible to separate easily (in terms of space and time) all of the above mentioned sub-processes. Compared with the chamber type units this approach eliminates the risk that the untreated mixture can get to the output of the plant directly from its input; besides it does not require to ensure the laminar flow with ideal displacement (which normally involves a large number of quieting plates). This also significantly simplifies the task of removing the flotation sludge from treated water without employing complicated scrubbing mechanisms to do this. Let us now consider the above mentioned sub-processes in greater detail. As it has already been discussed, the rate of microflotation is much higher, when flotated particles are aggregately unstable, i.e. undergo coagulation (flocculation), as in that case particles can grow in size, which in line with In case of turbulent microflotation the aggregation of particles can be achieved both before and after saturation of the mixture with gas microbubbles by way of introducing suitable reagents (coagulants and/or flocculants) and passing the mixture through the suitable static or dynamic mixer. According to Smolukhovsky In line with the conventional approach it is believed that aggregates of the maximum size are produced when coagulation (flocculation) occurs in relatively weak non-uniform hydrodynamic fields ( On the example of water/oil emulsions In that case the process of flocculation goes within few seconds. In more details the issue of optimisation of the hydrodynamic treatment regime in flocculation of other types of contaminants with the use of fine disperse sorbents (clays and metal hydroxides) is discussed in It is obvious that gas micro bubbles as well as particles will aggregate and/or coalesce between them as they move in the turbulent flow. Besides, as it has been demonstrated in the numerous studies Let us then assume that in the process of bubbles coalescence which accompanies the process of collection of particles on their surface, the bubbles reach a certain dimension of Assuming for example that Let us now consider the process of precipitation of fine particles and/or their aggregates on bubbles and simultaneous aggregation of bubbles in the turbulent flow. Let us assume that the rate of turbulent pulsation is sufficient to ensure that both varieties are in suspended (not laminated) state. Let us further assume that by the time, when bubbles are introduced, the process of aggregation of particles is completed. It is obvious that the introduction of bubbles at any earlier moment makes sense only for high volume concentrations of suspended particles By further substitution into By integration of Before we start the analyses of the received equations The thus obtained Interestingly enough, As follows from Let us then assume that due to development of the above described sub-processes all flotated particles and bubbles have combined into aggregates with the dimension of As it has already been noted for the case of very high initial concentration of particles The above described theoretical relationships allow to relatively easy estimate the major parameters and the effectiveness of the turbulent micro flotation. Let us assume for the argument sake that the water contains a certain amount of fine particulates of the density Let us also assume for example that  The principles of the turbulent microflotation and its capabilities have been tested and studied on the pilot plant, which was designed and manufactured based on the theoretical concept explained above. The picture of the plant and its diagram are shown in As it is shown on the diagram in The aluminium hydroxide particulates were used as objects for the turbulent microflotation and were generated directly in the turbulent flow through introduction and dilution (by around 500 times) of the concentrated solution of aluminium sulphate Al Microflotation was performed by the mixture of hydrogen and oxygen bubbles, generated in the electrolyser 1 by way of decomposition of some water. Cationic surfactant bis-quaternary ammonium base: ‘aethonium-C To visualise the process, before the input of aluminium sulphate small amounts of colloid solution of potassium-iron hexacyanoferrate (KFe[Fe(CN In every experimental run water consumption The flow turbulence level, which is normally characterised by the value of mechanical energy dissipation Under the conditions of the present experiment it has been found that for Volume concentration of the bubbles (hydrogen and oxygen) was controlled in the range In all runs the concentration of the flotated Al(OH) In every run the concentration of the colloid solution of the colouring agent KFe[Fe(CN The concentration of aethonium flotation agent varied in the range of Dimensions of the bubbles and flotation aggregates at the various stages of the process were estimated on the basis of statistical processing of the micrographs received on the microphotography cell 4 ( Based on the data on size distribution of flotation aggregates and bubbles at different stages of the hydrodynamic treatment in the turbulent flow the values of The recovery The content of aluminium As it can be seen from formula Hence we can make the conclusion that As it is well known, the stability of gas/liquid emulsion in terms of coalescence and/or aggregation is dependent on surfactants content and the content of fine suspension. The case discussed here is no exception, which is supported by the dependence As it follows from In summary Based on the above described theory of the turbulent microflotation and experimental results received on the relevant pilot plant we can come to the following conclusions: Effective recovery of small To ensure intensive heterocoagulation of particles and bubbles the dimensions of particles shall be enlarged by way of their coagulation or flocculation to reach at least 7 μm. To achieve effective separation from water of initially fine bubbles with particles attached to them, the mixture shall be subject to the hydrodynamic treatment in the turbulent flow, which will ensure combining of separate bubbles into large fast rising flotoaggregates. The relevant reagents (coagulants, flocculants, surfactants, etc.) shall be used in the process to prevent too fast aggregation and/or coalescence of bubbles and assure achieving of bubbles aggregation efficiency The turbulent micro flotation can be realised on the plant, where the complete process of flotation aggregates formation takes place in the turbulent flow inside the pipeline.  I would like to thank the Editorial Board of the Journal for their kind invitation to publish this article in the edition dedicated to the anniversary Stanislav Samuilovich Dukhin, my teacher, friend since many years and the co-author in the number of joint works. Much that has been achieved and done in the kinetic theory of flotation since 1960s, have been inspired by his ideas and energy. I feel happy and honoured to have such the mentor at the start of my scientific career. And I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to him and wish him good health, success and new scientific achievements. I would also like to thank the International Fund INTAS for their support and efforts to assists us in continuing our research under INTAS Grants INTAS-95-0132 and INTAS-95-0165. Without this assistance the research work presented above would not be possible. 