Solvent extraction studies of copper(II) from sulfate media have been carried out using a selected non-commercial extractant N,N-dihexyl-N′-hydroxypyridine-2-carboximidamide (DH2PIA) diluted with toluene and heptane. The presented results indicated that the extraction of copper(II) was very sensitive to the pHeq, extractant concentration and the type of diluent. Also the pH0.5 values depended on the type of diluent and varied from 2 for heptane to 2.8 for toluene. The isotherms of the extraction and the McCabe-Thiele diagram revealed that using the single stage extraction at O/A = 2 Cu(II) can be removed almost completely from the leach solution. Stripping of the loaded copper(II) to the sulfuric acid solution (10%, A/O = 10) yielded rich electrolyte with 37.7 g/L Cu(II), while the stripping test with the spent electrolyte allowed for enrichment of the solution to 67.6 g/L Cu(II). Moreover, the extraction of Cu(II) with DH2PIA from a leach solution containing also Fe(II) is selective and allows to enrich the organic phase in Cu(II).The increase of base metal prices and the stricter environmental laws and regulations have led to a renewed interest in copper hydrometallurgy. Copper is widely used because of its several essential properties for different technological applications, such as applications in electrical materials, constructions, transportation and industrial machinery parts, petroleum refining, and brass manufacture, etc. Several innovative copper hydrometallurgical processes have been proposed and piloted but in recent years much attention has been focused on the leaching of chalcopyrite by oxidizing agent as ferric salts (sulfate, chloride, nitrate A reactive solvent extraction is one of the most important techniques in hydrometallurgical operations to recover, separate and to purify the pay-metals. The development of the copper removal by solvent extraction method has also attracted a lot of attention worldwide and plays an important role in the world copper production. Hydroxyoxime extractants have been proposed mainly for extraction of copper(II) from sulfate solutions In the light of the considerations above and looking for effective and selective extracting reagents the aim of this work was to test a novel non-commercial compounds, hydrophobic Heptane (POCH) and toluene (POCH) were used as diluents to make the organic solution. Copper(II) sulfate pentahydrate (POCH), sodium sulfate (CHEMPUR), sodium hydroxide (CHEMPUR) and sulfuric acid (CHEMPUR) was used to make aqueous feed solutions. Aqueous feed solutions had constant concentration of metal ions (0.01 mol/L) and sulfate ions (0.1 mol/L). pH of the aqueous solution was regulated by an addition of appropriate amounts of sodium hydroxide or sulfuric acid. As solvents was used ultra-pure water (18.2 MΩ cm) All used reagents were of analytical-grade. 2-, 3- and 4-pyridinecarbonitrile (Sigma Aldrich), hydroxylamine hydrochloride (POCH), sodium bicarbonate (POCH), hydrochloric acid (POCH), sodium nitrite (Chempur), and amines: triethylamine (Sigma Aldrich) and dihexylamine (Merck) were used as reagents in the extractants syntheses. The reactions were conducted in distilled water, diluted hydrochloric acid (POCH) or in an anhydrous ethyl alcohol (POCH) dried by molecular sieves 3 Å (Sigma Aldrich).     The tests for extraction were conducted at constant temperature (T = 303.15 K) in a 100 mL glass reactor equipped with T50 titrator (Mettler Toledo) and pH measurement of aqueous solution ( Distribution ratio (D) and percentage extraction (%E) for Cu(II) ions were calculated using the following formula:  The extraction of Cu(II) from the sulfate solution (0.1 mol/L SO The variation in the equilibrium time has shown that, regardless on the type of the organic diluent, the shaking periods of 1 min is sufficient for the achieving of the extraction equilibrium and the prolonged shaking has no adverse effect on the extraction. Moreover, in the case of the heptane mixture the extraction is in 10% more efficient than that in the toluene mixture. The presented results indicate that only The effect of pH on the copper(II) extraction was examined by varying equilibrium pH from 0.5 to 5.0. The results are shown in The difference in the extraction efficiency in heptane and toluene is likely to be related to the activity of the extractant in different diluents. The most important factor is the molecular interactions between the diluent molecules and the extracted complex. Similar effect has been observed using hydroxyoxime chelating extractants, for which better equilibrium performance and kinetics have been found for aliphatic than for aromatic hydrocarbon diluents. The effect was explained by an oxime-hydroxyl group interaction with aromatic hydrocarbon molecules, which results in an additional energy barrier to be overcome before the formation of metal-oxime complex The effect of extractant concentration on the copper(II) extraction was studied by contacting sulfate solutions containing 0.01 mol/L copper(II) and 0.1 mol/L SO The influence of the initial copper(II) concentration on the extraction with DH2PIA dissolved in heptane and toluene was investigated at equal volumes of the both phases (A/O = 1) and at the constant equilibrium pH equal to 4 and without regulation of the pH after extraction (pH At the equilibrium pH of 4 the copper extraction capacity is much higher and clearly varies in different diluents. In heptane the capacity is determined as 0.56 mol Cu(II) per mole of DH2PIA, while in toluene it is 0.8 mol Cu(II) per mole of DH2PIA. Unfortunately, in the case of the heptane solution much higher concentration of the copper-DH2PIA complex results in its precipitate. The capacity of the extractant was also determined by the repeated contact of the organic phase containing 0.1 mol/L of DH2PIA and toluene or heptane as diluent with the fresh aqueous feed solution of the copper (0.16 mol/L Cu(II)). Similar to the experiments before, the maximum loading for Cu(II) was found to be 0.56 and 0.8 mol Cu(II) per mole of DH2PIA using heptane and toluene as diluent. The extraction isotherm was obtained by contacting of a simulated leach solution containing 10.5 g/L Cu(II) Various concentrations of sulfuric acid in the range of 3–20% were used as stripping agents for the extracted copper(II). The stripping equilibrium data are given in Extraction of Fe(II) and Fe(III) from the sulfate media (0.01 mol/L Fe(II) and 0.1 mol/L SO The results illustrated in The Fe(II) and Fe(III) extraction has also been conducted using 0.1 M solution of the metal ions. The obtained results pointed to the amounts of the extracted Fe(II) or Fe(III) are comparable to that obtained in the extraction from the 0.01 M solutions (see Table S.2 of the The selectivity of DH2PIA dissolved in toluene (0.1 mol/L) was also studied using a synthetic leach solutions containing 5 g/L Cu(II) and 0.4 g/L Fe(II) or Fe(III) (composition based on data from Based on the above results, it may be concluded that DH2PIA, similar to hydroxyoximes extractants, reacts as a chelating reagent. Therefore, the extraction equilibrium reaction can be written as follow: with the extraction equilibrium: For this equilibrium the distribution ratio (D) is defined as follow: where HL and L are neutral and deprotonated form of the extractant, respectively. Here Value of Moreover in the Eq. Taking logarithms and rearranging Eq. Graphical analysis of the experimental values of distribution ratio as a function of the pH   The obtained results show that DH2PIA can be proposed as the extractant to remove Cu(II) from sulfate solutions with very high selectivity towards Fe(II). The experimental results showed that the copper extraction and phases separation were fast but the efficiency depended on type of the organic diluent and the equilibrium pH of the aqueous feed solution. The quantitative extraction of Cu(II) was achieved at the equilibrium pH of 3.5 and 5 for DH2PIA dissolved in heptane and toluene, respectively. The pH The work was financed by a statutory activity subsidy from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 