Cathode material plays a crucial role in electro-Fenton process since its efficiency depends to the ability of the cathode material to generate H2O2 which controls the production rate of hydroxyl radicals, the main oxidizing agent for destruction of organic pollutants. Therefore, this study focused on the role of different cathode materials (i.e., carbon sponge (CS) of five different porosities, carbon felt (CF), and stainless steel (SS)) on the electrochemical oxidation and mineralization of sulfamethazine (SMT) in aqueous solution. Prior to studying the degradation and mineralization power of the cathodes under examination, we performed a systematic study of the production of H2O2. It was found that all the carbon sponge cathodes give high amounts of H2O2 in the solution, the most effective being the 45 ppi (pore per linear inch) porosity followed by carbon felt cathode. Stainless steel only gives poor amounts of H2O2 for current of 50 and 100 mA. The degradation and mineralization experiments were consistent with the yield of H2O2 for all electrolytic systems; electrolytic cells with higher H2O2 production capacity showed better performance on SMT degradation/mineralization. The most effective electrolytic system for SMT removal from polluted water was Pt/CS 45 ppi reaching a mineralization rate of 91.1% at 300 mA while the less effective was Pt/SS with only 41% mineralization.Large amount of micropollutants (pesticides, dyes, biocides, pharmaceuticals and care products…) issued from different chemical industry activities are continuously discharged to the natural water bodies resulting in their accumulation due to their bio-refractory character. Nowadays, they are detected in natural water streams, even frequently in drinking water sources. The presence of these organic micropollutants and their environmental degradation products in water bodies represents a growing concern over the world On the other hand, effective water treatment technologies, so called advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), were developed during the last decades The oxidation of organics by A systematic study of the effect of anode material on the electro-Fenton process has been already reported The model molecule SMT (C The experiments were carried out in a 250 mL electrolytic cell containing a platinum (Pt) anode and the given cathode, all of 6 cm × 3.5 cm geometric surface area. The Pt anode was purchased from PLATECXIS (France) whereas the cathodes were provided by different companies: carbon felt (MERSEN, France, density 0.08 g cm A Hameg HM8040 triple power supply was used to monitor the electrochemical cell which is equipped with a magnetic stirrer to homogenize the solution. First, the capacity of H Similarly, the electrolysis of the SMT solutions was performed in a 250 mL electrochemical cell. Oxidation of target pollutant SMT was carried out at room temperature and at pH = 3, the optimal value for electro-Fenton process The solution pH was monitored during the electrolysis; it never varied by>0.2 unit and no formation of sludge was observed. The stability of the cathodes was inspected visually and no change could be observed, it remained mechanically stable. In addition, the cathode was rinsed and immersed in a hydrochloric acid solution to remove any possible iron hydroxide precipitates. With this treatment the cathode could be reused for many experiments without any loss of performance. The evolution of hydrogen peroxide during electrolysis was monitored by following the concentration of the complex formed between H The time course decay of the SMT concentration during its electrooxidation was followed by a reversed phase HPLC using a Merck Lachrom chromatograph equipped with a quaternary pump L-7100, fitted with a Purospher RP 18, 5 µm, 25 cm × 4.6 mm (id) column at 40 The extent of mineralization of electrolyzed solutions during the electro-Fenton treatment of SMT was assessed from the abatement of their TOC value, determined on a Shimadzu TOC-V During the electro-Fenton process, the Fenton’s reagent (which leads to the formation of the main oxidizing agent,  The evolution of H To compare with the generation H To evaluate the effect of cathode material on the efficiency of the electro-Fenton process, the oxidative degradation of SMT was performed in an electrolytic cell of 250 mL at different current values. Samples were withdrawn at regular intervals and analyzed by HPLC. Analysis of the curves of concentration decay indicates that the oxidative degradation of SMT is always governed by pseudo first order reaction kinetics. In fact, all the tested cathodes exhibit an excellent efficiency for degradation without any significant differences observed between them. The degradation rate is the lowest with the 30 ppi cathode, it increases for 45 ppi close to 60 ppi and it decreases slightly for 80 and 100 ppi. An optimal current value is attained at 300–400 mA for the degradation efficiency of SMT while the maximum concentration of H On the other hand, the degradation kinetics of SMT is progressively slowed down when increasing current value beyond 300–400 mA (the difference between 300 and 400 mA is very small). These values are gathered in This fact is generally observed in EAOPs and can be explained by the increase of wasting effect of parasitic reactions that commonly occur during the electrochemical advanced oxidation such as: (i) H For comparison, the effect of current on oxidation of SMT with carbon felt and stainless steel cathodes is presented in In order to summarize the performance of cathodes under examination, the values of apparent rate constants for the oxidative degradation of SMT obtained from semi-logarithmic plots ln (C Based on the obtained results, the best cathode for degradation of SMT was the carbon sponge of 45 ppi exhibiting excellent removal rates. If one excludes the inefficient SS, the lowest rate constants were obtained with 30 and 100 ppi carbon sponge. On the other side, all the carbon sponge cathodes performed better than carbon felt. The stainless steel cathode provides poor capacity for the oxidation of SMT due to its very low production of hydroxyl radicals because of its very small specific surface area that contrasts with the carbon based cathodes with large surface area (owing to their 3D structure). Moreover, the results showed a significant difference between carbon sponge and carbon felt. This difference can be explained by considering the hydrodynamic conditions in the bulk. Although the carbon felt is a very porous material with a large specific surface area than carbon sponge (as can be seen from BET surface analysis (SM-1 and Fig. SM-1) and SEM images(SM-2), its denser physical structure hampers the mass transfer to the depth of the cathode. In the same way one can explain the difference rate constants of degradation observed between carbon sponge cathodes of different porosity; degradation capacity increases from 30 ppi (structure close to carbon felt) to 45 ppi owing to the favorable mass transport conditions, then decreases slightly for 60 ppi and more strongly for 80 and 100 ppi porosities due to the decrease of specific surface area. Mineralization experiments were performed to estimate the oxidizing power of the electro-Fenton process with different cathodes. Experiments were conducted under the same conditions as the degradation experiments by applying currents of 50, 100, 300 and 500 mA. The results obtained in terms of TOC removal efficiency for five carbon sponge cathodes are given in Conversely, lower mineralization efficiencies of SMT solution (in terms of TOC removal percentage) were obtained with carbon felt and stainless steel cathodes ( The results depicted in The mineralization current efficiency (MCE%) is an important parameter of electrochemical processes. In order to compare the current efficiency of different cathode material, this parameter was determined for each cathode according to the Eq. where This reaction was written according to the results obtained by Sopaj et al. The results depicted in These results clearly show the superiority of the carbon sponge over carbon felt. The stainless steel appears as the less effective cathode material with a very low MCE% values at all currents as a consequence of its poor H The performance of different cathodes was compared during the oxidative degradation and mineralization of the aqueous solution of the SMT drug by electro-Fenton process. The ability of carbon sponges with different porosities, carbon felt and stainless steel cathodes to produce H We are grateful to Dr. S. Gam Derouich and to Pr. J.-Y. Piquemal for the SEM images and the BET analysis, respectively. Flamur Sopaj acknowledges the embassy of France in Kosovo for the PhD scholarship granted by the French government, which enabled the realization of this work. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: