Starch is a major determinant of the glycemic responses elicited by our diets, but the exact contribution of the two main amylolytic enzymes (salivary and pancreatic α-amylases) remains a matter of debate. Our aim was to investigate the contribution of the oral, gastric and intestinal phases to the hydrolysis of starch in bread and pasta during dynamic in vitro digestions using DiDGI®. Before its inactivation by the low gastric pH, salivary α-amylase released about 80% of the starch in bread and 30% of that in pasta, hydrolysing over half of it into oligosaccharides. Accordingly, the contribution of pancreatic α-amylase during the intestinal phase was lower for bread than pasta. Our results are well correlated with in vivo data, and demonstrate the importance of salivary α-amylase during oro-gastric processing of starchy foods. This finding is discussed in relation with observations regarding salivary α-amylase from other fields of knowledge.Starch is the most important, abundant and digestible polysaccharide in human nutrition. Being exclusively made up of glucose residues, and accounting for 20–50% of the total energy intake ( There are two key enzymes that participate in the digestion of starch: human salivary α-amylase (HSA) and pancreatic α-amylase. HSA initiates the amylolytic process in the oral cavity ( However, simulating gastric digestion at a stable acidic pH is not representative of the The three test foods were purchased from a supermarket: freshly baked white wheat French baguette (common baguette, Auchan, Plaisir, France), no. 5 wheat spaghetti (Barilla Alimentari, Parma, Italy), and no. 5 gluten-free (GF) spaghetti (Barilla Alimentari, Parma, Italy) in which the wheat flour was replaced by a mixture of 95% maize and 5% rice flours. Whole saliva pool from 10 human donors (Normal saliva in 5 mL aliquots, ref. 991-05-P-5) was acquired from Lee Biosolutions (Maryland Heights, United States) and conserved at −80 °C. Pepsin from gastric mucosa (P-6887), pancreatin (P-1750) and pancreatic α-amylase (A-3176), all of porcine origin, were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint-Quentin Fallavier, France). Amyloglucosidase from Only the crumb of the bread, separated from the crust using a 3-cm diameter cookie cutter cylinder, was used for the experiments. Both types of pasta were prepared in a Thermomix food processor (Thermomix TM 31, Vorwek, Nantes, France) following the same procedure: pasta was cooked in pre-heated salted (7 g/L of NaCl) mineral water (Evian, Évian-les-bains, France) for 11 min at 90 °C under the lowest speed (spoon function). Immediately after, the cooking water was drained and the pasta rinsed 3 times with mineral water. The ratio of pasta to water was kept at 17/100 (w/w) both during cooking and rinsing. The water content of food samples (5 g ± 0.5 g) was determined in triplicate by measuring the weight loss after drying at 110 °C for 24 h in an oven (UF160, Memmert, Büchenbach, Germany). Total and resistant starch contents were determined in triplicate and used to estimate digestible starch. Total starch was quantified using a modified version of a previously described method ( Resistant starch was determined using a modified version of Goñi’s method ( Digestible starch was calculated as the difference between total and resistant starch. The protein content of the spaghetti was determined by the Kjeldahl method in an independent laboratory (ABIOPOLE – Groupe Qualtech, Vandœuvre, France) with a conversion factor of 5.7 between nitrogen and protein contents. The protein content of bread was estimated from the French Table of Food Composition corrected for the nitrogen conversion factor (5.7 instead of 6.25) and adjustment for the measured starch content ( Dynamic For practical reasons, food comminution and saliva incorporation were dissociated.   The gastric compartment of DiDGI® was prepared with an operating temperature of 37 °C and a stirring speed of 10 rpm. The fasted gastric content consisted of 20 mL of a Simulated Gastric Fluid electrolyte solution (eSGF), 10 µL of 0.3 M CaCl Intestinal digestion was conducted in the same DiDGI® compartment. 22 mL of a Simulated Intestinal Fluid electrolyte solution (eSIF), 10 mL of water and 80 µL of 0.3 M CaCl All digestion experiments were monitored qualitatively (visual analysis of the devolution of food macrostructure) and quantitatively (dry mass and proportions of starch released and hydrolysed into oligosaccharides). Before analysis, samples were thawed at 4 °C and centrifuged (10 min, 3000 The devolution of food macrostructure was followed through camera pictures taken at the end of the oral phase, and after 60 min and 120 min of both the gastric and intestinal phases of digestion ( Released starch refers to all solubilised starch fractions and products of starch hydrolysis. This starch fraction was measured as glucose after incubation with amyloglucosidase and centrifugation, as previously described ( The proportion of starch hydrolysed into oligosaccharides, with degrees of polymerization of up to 10 ( The glycemic index (GI) of each food was estimated using the The water, starch and protein contents of each food is presented in Dynamic digestions of bread, wheat and GF spaghetti comprising oral (2.5 min), gastric and intestinal phases (120 min each) were carried out in triplicate. Both qualitative and quantitative methods were employed to monitor (1) the devolution of food macrostructure, (2) the starch release from the food matrix, and (3) its hydrolysis into oligosaccharides. The visual appearance of the chimes during the digestion experiments is presented in The dry masses of the fine particulate material recovered in the 3000 The cumulative fine particle pellet mass is also represented in  According to the starch release curves (dark squares), oral digestion caused the release of 24% of bread starch, a value that increased to 80% within only 20 min of gastric digestion. Oral and gastric digestion of both pastas appeared slower and less extensive. Starch released during the oral phase amounted to around 3.5% of the total, and the plateau, reached later than for bread, corresponded to only ≈30% of the total starch. Consequently, intestinal digestion of bread starch was characterized by a very slight increase, of about 7% (final plateau at 87%), whereas intestinal digestion of both pastas showed a fast and intense release of the remaining starch (measured at 94 and 100% of total starch in wheat and GF pasta, respectively, at the end of the experiment). According to the results in The starch release kinetics obtained using the The starch release kinetics during the gastric phase of our digestions, obtained using the same sample analytical procedures, are also plotted in The role of human salivary α-amylase (HSA) in starch digestion is often overlooked in favour of that of pancreatic α-amylase. Conducting We may first highlight the good agreement between the different methods used to monitor the digestion experiments. For example, bread particles were the smallest after the oral phase ( The shape of the starch and oligosaccharide release kinetics ( The fastest starch hydrolysis rate was observed for bread. We had recently shown that as much as 80% of bread starch can be released during the first 20 min of gastric digestion ( Wheat pasta elicited a lower starch digestion rate than wheat bread, in agreement with previous The rate of starch hydrolysis during gastric digestion of wheat spaghetti was similar to that of GF spaghetti, but it was slightly lower during the intestinal phase. In parallel, despite the same initial particle size and digestive conditions, particles of wheat pasta were degraded faster than those of GF pasta in the gastric phase, whereas the opposite was observed in the intestinal phase ( On the one hand, it is clear that the structural properties of food can strongly impact the rate of starch digestion and consequently the glycemic indexes. On the other hand, it is also evident that food structure can be extensively disrupted in the digestive stages that precede intestinal digestion, hence diminishing potential differences derived from the structural properties of each food. This is indeed what our results show: important differences in the extent of oro-gastric starch digestion for bread and pasta that nearly vanished within 30 min of intestinal digestion only. As it was shown above, these results are consistent with both To the best of our knowledge, the main arguments serving as a justification for the limited extent of HSA’s contribution to starch digestion are the short duration of the oral phase and the erroneous idea that this enzyme is quickly inactivated once food boluses are swollen. Although HSA has been extensively studied, its usefulness to digestion is still questioned ( The present study not only confirms the important role played by HSA during the gastric digestion of bread, but also demonstrates that, despite the more compact structure of pasta and a much lower level of saliva incorporation during bolus formation, the contribution of salivary amylase to the digestion of starch in pasta is far from being negligible. The starch digestion rates during gastric digestion were well correlated with a widely used We would like to thank David Forest and Thomas Cattenoz for their technical help in the laboratory. We would like to acknowledge the IDEX-Paris Saclay consortium for partially supporting this research through a PhD grant and we are grateful to François Boué and Evelyne Lutton for their important help in obtaining this doctoral grant and helpful discussions. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.