In the cement industry, high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) has been used since 1985. At the first applications, this equipment has been installed in the existing cement grinding circuits as an open circuit precrusher in order to crush clinker especially. The cement factories produce different type of cement by using basically clinker, gypsum and additives like limestone and trass. The additives generally are not precrushed before ball mill circuits.
                  In this study, three different mixed feeds were prepared with clinker, gypsum, limestone and trass to evaluate the performance of an industrial scale open circuit HPGR. The results of the tests show that due to the stress concentrates on soft and fractured material, the performance of HPGR becomes worse when the relatively hard material (clinker) is fed together with soft and weak materials (i.e. gypsum, limestone, trass). In addition to the industrial tests, the piston die tests have been also performed with narrow size fractions of the mixed and unmixed materials. Crushing and grinding are unit operation consuming high energy, and ores fed to comminution section may be highly variable and heterogonous due to ore formations and mining operations, therefore performance of comminution sections can be frequently change. For operating and modeling of grinding systems fed heterogonous material, understanding of what the effect of feeding soft and hard material together on the system and how they interact with each other during comminution is important. Some studies have been performed to evaluate mineral mixture behavior in laboratory ball mills ( This paper is concerned with the performance of the compressed bed crushing of pure and mixed minerals in an industrial high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) and a piston die, and individual behavior of the particles in mixed and unmixed bed. In this way, the performance of HPGR used for mixed and unmixed materials feed in the cement industry was evaluated; at the same time this paper shows the way to understate the crushing behavior of HPGR applications in the mineral industry. In order to evaluate the effect of mixed feed on the performance of an industrial scale open circuit HPGR with partial recycling (in this type open circuit HPGR application, all HPGR discharge is divided into two part with a simple splitter and one of them is fed back to the HPGR in order to improve particle bed between rolls. Amount of it is arranged according to power draw, operating pressure, vibration and tonnage of the HPGR, The design parameters of the HPGR on which the industrial tests were performed are given in In the cement grinding plant, the HPGR which the tests were performed on is normally operating as precrusher to prepare clinker feed to a ball mill circuit. On the other hand the cement industry produces different type of cement by adding different materials like limestone and trass. The additives are also fed to grinding circuit due to the cement type. In this grinding circuit, under normal operational conditions, the additives (limestone and trass) are directly fed to the ball mill. Three industrial scale tests (whose conditions are given in In addition to these industrial tests, some piston die tests (summarized in For each industrial test, particle size distributions of fresh feed and product are given in In order to evaluate the results of tests, the relation between specific energy consumption and reduction ratio (RR  Because of some operational conditions and mechanical problems like different material feeding, vibration of the HPGR and feeding system oscillation, the industrial tests could not performed under same conditions. Total HPGR tonnage is very important operational parameter and affects the operational gap and pressure of the equipment. Under same pressure set value of hydraulic system condition, total HPGR feed tonnage increases the operational pressure and gap ( Because of some differences among the industrial tests conditions, it is not easy to explain the industrial tests’ results. Hence, to support these results, some laboratory tests were also performed by piston and die. In order to understand the particle bed breakage behavior under high pressure of HPGR (continuous process), piston and die tests (a batch process) can be used. Batch and continuous particle bed breakage mechanisms under high pressure compression are illustrated in In order to evaluate the breakage behavior of the materials (clinker, limestone, trass and mixed), piston die test summarized in Displacement–force graphs for clinker, limestone, trass and mix materials with 800 Product size distributions of −9.5 In order to evaluate the breakage behavior of the individual component in mixed feed, the fractions between −13.2 The findings of this research correlate to the work conducted by In this paper, the performance evaluation of an open circuit HPGR operated with clinker and mixed feed (clinker plus additives) was presented. Under different specific energy consumption conditions, as the ratio of relatively soft and brittle material (trass) in the feed is increased, the fine product is getting coarser. This result was also supported with piston die tests. The result obtained from the mixture feed piston die test indicates that, when soft and hard materials are crushed together, soft and brittle particles were broken more effectively. These tests also show that displacement breakage behavior of particle bed under compression depends on particle size and material. The piston die tests indicate that mixture feed decreases the breakage of the hard material, thus particle size distribution of hard material in mixed feed is coarser than the product of individual breakage. Because this product is fed to next step grinding system, generally ball mill, the performance of the ball mill circuit is also affected inversely.