In dry fine grinding processes the relevance of particle-particle interactions rises with increasing product fineness. These particle-particle interactions reduce the grinding efficiency and complicate the process control. The adsorption of grinding aid molecules on the product particle surface is a common measure to handle these effects. To ensure an efficient grinding aid application, the impacts of additives on particle and bulk properties, which influence the micro-processes inside the mill, need to be understood. Within this study the effects of several grinding aids on dry fine grinding of limestone in a laboratory vibration mill were investigated. Unlike in many other scientific works, the impacts of grinding aids were analyzed on different levels simultaneously: Grinding success and agglomerate size distributions were evaluated by wet and dry particle size measurements, respectively. Additionally, material coating on the grinding media, powder flowabilities and particle specific surface energies were measured. It was shown that all of the investigated grinding aids influence the grinding efficiency. However, the formation of agglomerates is not necessarily linked to the product fineness. Furthermore, a strong impact of certain grinding aids on the flowability of the product powder was determined. Thereby, the bulk flow behavior also determines the grinding result as it affects the stress mechanism inside the mill. Moreover, a direct relation between surface energy and powder flowability as well as agglomeration behavior could be demonstrated.In many industrial dry fine grinding processes, chemical liquid additives are added to the process in order to either increase the product throughput, decrease the specific power consumption or to reach a certain product fineness Nowadays, a direct impact of grinding aids on the fracture behavior of the particles is assumed to be irrelevant. The effects of grinding aids are rather attributed to adsorption phenomena on the particle surface, and thus, to a reduction of particle-particle interaction forces In the 1930s, Rehbinder Apparently, grinding aids change various properties of the product powder, and thus, affect the grinding process in different ways. In order to optimize a grinding aid application, the interactions of the grinding aid with the product particles and the resulting impacts on the product properties need to be known. Unfortunately, the variety of existing grinding aids, ground products, mill types and process parameters increase the challenge to achieve a comprehensive understanding. The aim of this work is to investigate the impacts of nine grinding aids from different substance classes on several product properties like particle size distribution, agglomerate size, specific surface area and powder flowability as well as grinding media coating. Additionally, the specific free surface energy of the product powder is analyzed using inverse gas chromatography. An eccentric vibration mill of the type GSM 06 (Siebtechnik GmbH, Germany) was used for the grinding experiments. The mill is equipped with two identical, cylindrical 1 L grinding chambers made of steel. All operating parameters were kept constant in this examination. Each chamber was filled with 0.3 L of steel balls with a median diameter of 6 mm and a solid density of 7.86 kg/L. In order to obtain median particle sizes in the lower micron range (here: x For the grinding experiments, calcitic limestone Durcal 40 (98% CaCO Within this study, nine chemicals (all Sigma Aldrich) from different substance classes were used as grinding aids (see The particle size distributions of the product samples were measured by laser diffraction using a HELOS instrument (Sympatec, Germany). For the wet analysis, the powder samples were dispersed in ethanol and treated by ultrasonic waves prior to the analysis. Samples for the particle size analysis were taken from the total amount of ground material. A manual Blaine device (Tonindustrie, Germany) was used to analyze the mass-related specific surface area of the product samples. In order to improve the statistical reliability of the results, three samples per test setting were analyzed in three-fold determination. The agglomeration tendency of the product powders was evaluated using two different kinds of dry particle size measurements. First, the samples were analyzed with the HELOS instrument using the dry dispersion unit RODOS. Thereby, an air stream with a pressure of 0.4 bar was used to disperse the particles moderately. A second type of agglomerate size was analyzed using an image analyzer QICPIC (Sympatec, Germany). The instrument was equipped with the dry dispersing unit GRADIS. This dispersing unit enables the measurement of dry samples with a minimum of agglomerate dispersion. Hence, mainly loose agglomerates are detected when analyzing powder samples with high product fineness. The powder flowability was analyzed using a ring shear tester RST-XS (Dietmar Schulze Schüttguttechnik, Germany) and a 30 ml shear cell. Measurements were performed at ambient conditions and repeated twice for every product powder. At the beginning of the shear test, the powder was pre-sheared under a normal stress of 10 kPa in order to load the bulk material with a consolidation stress σ At this point, the flowability index According to Jenike The specific surface energy was analyzed by inverse gas chromatography (IGC) using a surface energy analyzer SEA (Surface measurement systems, UK). For this measuring principle, a dry powder sample is placed into a silanized glass column and flowed through by a defined volume of known gaseous probe molecules which interact with the solid surface by adsorption. The elution of these probe molecules from the powder sample is achieved by an inert carrier gas flow. The carrier gas volume required for the elution depends on the interactions between probe molecule and solid surface, and describes the surface properties of the powder sample. A more detailed description of this principle can be found in literature (e.g. For the test runs, a powder sample was filled into a silanized glass column (diameter of 2 mm) directly after grinding. Prior to the measurement, the columns were conditioned for 6 h at a temperature of 70 °C and a relative humidity of 0%. Additionally, methane injections were used for dead volume corrections. Then, the BET surface was determined by multiple nonane injections of a relative pressure between 0.05 and 0.25. The surface energy was analyzed by a series of non-polar (n-decane, n-nonane, n-octane, n-heptane) and polar (toluene, chloroform) probe molecule injections at various surface coverages between 0.5 and 12% and a column temperature of 30 °C. The elution peaks were analyzed by their center of mass in order to determine the retention time The dispersive component ( Due to the energetic heterogeneity of surfaces a value The impact of grinding aid type and its concentration on the product fineness was analyzed by wet particle size measurements as well as specific Blaine surface tests. As shown in Within the investigated dosage range, the finest product is achieved by using carboxylic acids, followed by amines as well as ethanol and high concentrations of hexanol. These results correspond to those of Dombrowe et al. The particle size slightly becomes narrower with the addition of most of the grinding aids, which is indicated by the smaller values of the polydispersity index (PDI) in comparison to the sample ground without grinding aid. Moreover, moderate and strong effects are achieved in the case of high concentrations of TIPA and carboxylic acids, respectively. The results of the carboxylic acids are in agreement with findings from the literature. Here, a similar decrease of the PDI was shown for the dry grinding of calcite by applying different fatty acid additives In addition to the particle sizes, Hereby, the specific surface areas obtained by IGC are approximately four times larger than the corresponding Blaine values. These differences agree with comparisons between nitrogen BET and Blaine tests from the literature, e.g. The influences of the grinding aids on the dry measured particle sizes x As it can be seen, the values obtained by the dry performed laser diffraction measurement (black bars, x Although the image analysis constantly gives much higher values (light grey bars, x The impacts of the grinding aids on the powder flowability are shown in According to the figure, grinding without any additive leads to a Within this work, the total specific surface energy The sample ground without any additive shows a surface energy of In addition, The ratios of the two components show similar trends as the specific surface energies Besides particle sizes and bulk properties, the coating on the grinding media by product particles was determined by weighing the grinding balls after sieving. All of the chemicals reduce the coating on the grinding media. Among all grinding aids, the alcohols lead to the highest product adhesions with values of 11.2 (ethanol), 6.2 (hexanol) and 6.5 g/m The results of this study demonstrate a substantial meaning of the functional group of the grinding aid molecule. According to Regarding the product fineness, the optimal dosage amount additionally depends on the number of functional groups within the grinding aid molecule. For example, insufficient dosing is more likely when using chemicals with a low ratio of polar to non-polar atoms like hexanol, decanol and undecanoic acid. It indicates that the particle surface needs to be covered by functional groups to a certain degree in order to reach the best result. Therefore, molecules with several as well as evenly distributed polar atoms affect a more complete and protective adsorption layer. In fact, it is difficult to say how grinding aid molecules adsorb effectively, which area they cover on the particle surface and how steric effects impair the distribution and adsorption of further molecules. In order to evaluate the molecule adsorption mechanism, the ratio N Due to the wide range of grinding aid concentration and different product finenesses, the values of N Those results partly correspond to findings from the literature (see A comparison of those results with the values of N A reduced grinding efficiency at higher particle surface coverages is caused by an additional effect: As shown in this study, high powder flowabilities as well as low states of agglomeration are mainly affected by high concentrations of carboxylic acids. In contrast to the best grinding result, this change of the bulk behavior goes along with a higher surface coverage of N However, it needs to be taken into account that the bulk behavior is determining the stress mechanism as well as friction inside the mill: On the one hand, powders with a high flowability are easily pushed out of the active grinding zone between two approaching grinding balls. This circumstance leads to a decreased mass of stressed particles per stress event, and thus, to a low product related stress number (definition of stress number see Kwade The polydispersity index PDI supports these observations since high concentrations of the carboxylic acids and TIPA affect both high powder flowabilities and lower PDIs. Schönert Usually, the temperature inside the milling chamber needs to be considered as a further important parameter: On the one hand, the thermal conditions may influence the stabilizing mechanism of the grinding aid molecules, e.g. by changing the adsorption behavior of the grinding aid molecules. On the other hand, the impact of the grinding aids on the bulk flow behavior may lead to a varying extent of energy dissipation, and thus, heat generation. Within this study, the temperature inside the chamber measured directly after grinding was within a very narrow range between 31 and 34 °C, without any clear dependence on the grinding aid or grinding aid concentration. This is mainly attributed to the used vibration mill which is not suitable for any studies on temperature effects since a large part of the generated heat is released via the walls of the vibration milling chamber simultaneously to the grinding process. Therefore, no clear statement regarding the relation between grinding aid effects and temperature can be made at this point. However, these relations will be investigated in detail in a future study using a different type of mill. The ability to affect both a reduction of the agglomerate size x In general, there is no clear relation between the agglomeration behavior (indicated by the dry measured particle or agglomerate sizes x Furthermore, the fineness of the product needs to be taken into account when comparing the agglomeration behavior of the different samples: As the particle-particle interactions become more decisive with increasing product fineness, agglomeration of smaller particles is promoted by those interactions which generally leads to higher agglomerate sizes. Therefore, the agglomerate size x It is shown, that the amines and carboxylic acids cause to the most effective decrease of agglomeration already at comparatively small number of grinding aid molecules per surface area. By using this kind of chart to compare the different samples, even the alcohols turn out to have a positive effect regarding agglomeration. However, the effect is much lower compared to the amines and carboxylic acids. In the case of amines and carboxylic acids, the relation to the bulk properties like the powder flowability (see As shown in the previous chapter, the grinding performance is overlapped by other parameters like the bulk flow properties. Regarding agglomeration, small molecules like ethanol are assumed to only form a thin adsorption layer on the particle surface which might already be sufficient for preventing a direct contact of the particle surfaces, and thus, for hindering the formation of strong aggregates while grinding. Consequently, the grinding efficiency is improved and a higher product fineness is obtained. However, such a thin layer may not be sufficient to hold a certain distance between the particles, which would be necessary to diminish the impact of attractive particle-particle interactions and consequently change the bulk behavior. A further important parameter regarding those adhesive forces is the surface energy, which is extensively discussed in the next chapter. The product coating on the grinding media (see The IGC results show that the surface energy value Within this study, a significant impact of the grinding aid type and grinding aid concentration on product properties like fineness, agglomeration tendency, powder flowability and surface energy was shown. Thereby, a direct correlation of the fineness and the surface energy was not found since the grinding aids show contrary tendencies. For instance, several additives like amines, ethanol and carboxylic acids affect high product finenesses, even though they show deviating (or even no) impacts on the surface energy at the same time. This finding underlines again that the grinding result is not only determined by the micro-level properties caused by the adsorption of stabilizing molecules, but also by macro-level properties like the bulk flow behavior (see previous chapters) which are in turn a consequence of the particle stabilization. In The dependence of the particle-particle adhesion forces on the surface energy is an essential component in different mathematical models that are used for calculating these adhesion forces. For instance, two of the most popular approaches dealing with the adhesion of smooth and elastically deformable particles of the diameter R as well as identical physical properties show a linear relation between the particle-particle adhesion force and the surface energy (see JKR-model As it is also illustrated in the figure, agglomerate sizes as well as the reciprocal powder flowability indices increase almost linearly (R Since the particle size distributions of the samples vary due to the grinding aid application, deviations from the shown trend are a logical consequence: On the one hand, a deviating particle size results in differing adhesion forces as shown in Eqs. The adhesion forces are affected by additional parameters which are neither considered by the JKR or DMT model, nor characterized by the IGC measurement and, are thus, not included in surface energy values. This applies in particular to the particle morphology and the surface roughness, both heterogeneously distributed quantities which influence the adhesion force significantly (see e.g. Liquid bridging caused by excessive amounts of grinding aids at high concentrations might play a significant role. At increasing dosages, adhesive forces may rise again due to liquid bridges between the particles even though the surface energy of the particle stays constant or is even reduced further. Surface energy is also a heterogeneously distributed quantity. A surface energy value However, the results presented here clearly show that IGC measurements are a suitable tool for characterizing the impact of grinding aids on the adhesive particle-particle interactions. A more detailed calculation of the adhesion forces involving other parameters like distance between the particles, particle size distribution as well as surface roughness is a focus of future studies. Within this study, deviating impacts of several pure grinding aids on different bulk and particle properties of ground limestone were identified. It became clear that the impact of the grinding aid is primarily determined by the substance group of the additive. It was shown that the highest product fineness is obtained by different kinds of amines, alcohols and carboxylic acids. Thereby, grinding aids with a high ratio of non-polar to polar parts like longer chained alcohols and carboxylic acids require a higher dosage to achieve the best effect. The reduction of agglomeration by a grinding aid application is also determined by the substance group of the additive, whereas the amines and carboxylic acids show the best results. However, a high state of agglomeration does not necessarily cause a coarse product which is particularly shown by the use of ethanol as a grinding aid. Moreover, a comparison of the results from this study with data from the literature indicates that a monolayer coverage of stabilizing molecules on the particle surface is not always a condition for obtaining the best grinding result. Here, an overlapping impact of the powder flowability, which may strongly rise at high concentrations of certain grinding aids, was shown: Similar to the agglomeration behavior, the strongest and smallest increase of the powder flowability is obtained by carboxylic acids and ethanol, respectively. Regarding the carboxylic acids, a strong change of the flow behavior is obtained at grinding aid concentrations that are higher than those required for reaching the highest product fineness. It is therefore assumed that a high powder flowability reduces the grinding efficiency by affecting the stress mechanism inside the mill. By inverse gas chromatography it was shown, that the surface energy of the limestone particles is reduced significantly by most of the grinding aids. Thereby, a stronger impact of the additives on the specific part of the surface energy is seen in comparison to the dispersive part. While no correlation between surface energy and grinding success became clear, a strong relation between the surface energy and the bulk properties was determined: With increasing surface free energy the agglomerate size and powder flowability increase and decrease, respectively. Thus, inverse gas chromatography turned out to be a useful tool in order to characterize the impact of grinding aids on attracting adhesion forces between dry particles. We acknowledge the German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy (BMWi) for funding this research project (03ET1253A) as well as ThyssenKrupp Industrial Solutions and BASF Construction Solutions for their financial support.