Aluminum melts are often contaminated with non-metallic inclusions. Large amounts of these inclusions and oxides accelerate the trend of porosity formation in casting parts. They significantly decrease the corrosion resistance and mechanical properties of the aluminum castings. Fluxing is one of the conventional methods for removing inclusions from melts. Efficiency of this process is affected by several parameters, such as: chemical composition, morphology, granulation, the amount of flux, fluxing temperature, fluxing time, and the fluxing method.
                  In this paper, the effect of fluxing temperature on the refining process of molten aluminum alloy has been studied. They have been investigated using tensile test, reduced pressure test (RPT), K-mould test, metallography, SEM, radioscopy, and the optimum temperature of fluxing has been determined.Recycling of scraps and aluminum chips of machining is very important because of the wide applications of this metal, particularly in automotive industry. Recycling of aluminum turnings and chips is a complicated process because of the curl shape, fine size, and their contaminated surfaces with oxides and machining oils. Aluminum melt easily reacts with oxygen and moisture of the atmosphere because of its high reactivity and forms oxide inclusions (often Al There are various types of inclusions in aluminum melts, such as: oxides, nitrides, carbides, borides, chlorides, fluorides, and molten salts Most of salt fluxes have been made based on the equi-molar composition of NaCl–KCl. They have the eutectic temperature of about 660 preventing melt oxidation; accelerating inclusions removal; recycling metallic aluminum from dross; removing oxide build-up from the furnace wall. Generally, salt fluxes increase the removing efficiency of inclusions from the melts, because they have an appropriate wettability with oxides and inclusions. Most of fluxes contain fluoride compounds, such as Na The most effective parameters in fluxing treatment are: chemical composition, morphology, granulation, and the amount of flux, fluxing temperature, the contact time of flux and melt, and fluxing method Chips and turnings from machining of aluminum casting parts were collected and heated in a muffle heat-treating furnace to 250 After fluxing and skimming the melt, samples of reduced pressure test (RPT), The fracture surface of The results of chemical composition of molten aluminum are shown in As shown in Fracture surfaces of the tensile specimens have been studied using SEM. They are shown in SEM image of another inclusion in sample T Results of density index (amount of porosity) and Some of experimental observations related to the type of dross (wet or dry), weight, and color of dross at several fluxing temperatures are presented in Inclusion removal from molten aluminum in fluxing treatment is generally performed through two mechanisms: physical separation and chemical reaction. Physical separation means refining dirty melts through floatation of inclusions toward slag using inert gas bubbles. In this mechanism inclusion removal depends on two factors: floatation velocity and the difference between surface tensions of melt and inclusion. In chemical reaction mechanism, inclusion removal mainly occurs through chemical reactions between non-metallic inclusions and reactive fluxes. It is difficult to evaluate the contribution of each mechanism in melt refining process precisely. There are some evidences that show both mechanisms can act in refining process. However, it practically seems that physical separation of inclusions from melt is more effective and rapid than their separation by chemical reactions. According to Green and Born kinetic equation Drop in flux fluidity, not only decreases the refining efficiency, but also can form salt inclusions in molten metal. These salt inclusions were identified using SEM-EDS in The fluxes used in the experiments contain Na One of the important factors in refining is wettability. The contact angle between inclusion and melt increases with increasing temperature. Therefore, wettability between inclusion and molten aluminum decreases and causes rapid inclusion removal from aluminum melt. The lower mechanical properties of sample T As seen from  Refining will not be very effective in fluxing temperatures less than 700 Hydrogen absorption in molten aluminum has been accelerated at high fluxing temperatures such as 790 Refining aluminum melts at 740 The results of experimental evaluations of tensile test, SEM, metallography, RPT test, and Based on the results obtained in this research, the optimum fluxing temperature is about 740