Most fatigue models for concrete under compression assume, as an axiom, that compressive tests are a limit case for a cyclic test where failure is achieved in the first cycle. This is supported by the fact that the crack patterns obtained in both cases are similar to the naked eye. This paper focuses on verifying whether this observation is correct or not. For that, we used a Computed Tomography Scan together with digital image processing to obtain 3D damage maps of tested 40 mm edge-length cubes made of steel fiber-reinforced concrete. The cubes were classified in series according to the type of loading: intact, monotonic and cyclic. They were scanned to acquire their 3D damage maps. Additionally, a specific post-processing algorithm was developed by the authors to compare the different crack patterns. The results show that average damage maps for monotonically and cyclically-tested cubes are statistically similar, thereby confirming the initial hypothesis for steel fiber-reinforced concrete. Furthermore, damage distribution near the platens apparently depends on whether it is a fixed platen or it is adjustable to the specimen surface due to a spherical seat.In recent years, the increased strength of concretes and the greater use of slender structural elements have focused attention on the development of fatigue models. These models associate the cyclic loads, which in fact have become the main loads on structures in many cases, with a fatigue life prediction. Most models are deterministic In addition, it is commonly assumed, as an axiom, the hypothesis that quasi-static monotonic tests are a limit case of cyclic tests where failure is achieved in the first cycle (also called hypothesis of convergence to the However, after the research carried out by Ass-Jakobsen The CT-Scan is a non-destructive technique which currently is being used widely to study the microstructure of materials. This technology is able to define the density of each specimen voxel (volumetric pixel) by assigning a shade of gray according to voxel density. Light shades of grey correspond to high densities, whereas dark shades of grey correspond to low densities. In recent years, many authors have conducted research on the concrete microstructure through this technique, in particular, many have focused on the fiber-orientation and fiber-distribution inside a concrete matrix In this paper, the CT-Scan is used in order to detect the voids inside the material – a self-compacting fiber reinforced concrete – which are either voids of a pre-existing pore or those making up a newly formed crack. The specimens were classified into series according to the type of loading: intact, monotonic and cyclic; series of specimens were large enough to be statistically representative of each loading case. Apart from the beneficial effect of fibers in enlarging the fatigue life This paper is structured as follows: The experimental procedure is presented in Section In this section, the materials, the experimental procedure and the scanning procedure are described. Cubic specimens from a single self-compacting concrete made of a siliceous aggregate of 8 mm maximum size and CEM I 52.5 SR cement were used throughout the experiments. The mixing proportions by weight were: 1: The cubes were 40 mm in edge length and were cut from prisms of 100 × 100 mm All the cubes were labeled so that they could be identified later on. The label was glued to one of the lateral faces so that the direction of casting ( The concrete compressive strength The concrete cubes were divided into three series as follows. The cyclic series consisted of 16 specimens tested under low-cycle fatigue loading, the monotonic series were 8 of the specimens tested under monotonic compressive loading and the intact series were another 8 cubes, taken at random, which were scanned in order to get the fiber and the void distribution within the concrete before being tested. Compressive fatigue tests (cyclic loads) were performed on the specimens of the cyclic series. The tests were carried out at a loading frequency of 10 All the tests were conducted in a servo-hydraulic machine with a maximum loading capacity of 250 kN. The machine was equipped with two compressive steel platens and a spherical seat in the upper part in order to align the load, see Once the specimens had been tested under monotonic or cyclic loads, they were scanned by using a CT-Scan. A total of 32 scannings of specimens were performed. The CT-Scan used was a GE Phoenix v The result of the scanning is a dot matrix containing the cartesian coordinates The post-processing software identifies empty voxels or, that is, voxels with a density equal to both voids or cracks, in order to generate a 3D image of the specimen damage, see The empty volume per specimen in every series is set forth in Neither direct analysis of the 3D images generated by the CT-Scan nor the comparison of the average empty volumes allows defining the crack patterns. Therefore, an analysis procedure, referred to as a In this section we describe the circumferential test, which is the procedure for analyzing the raw data from the CT-Scan in order to disclose the extent of damage generated in the mechanical tests. The steps for analyzing the data are as follows: First, the voxel coordinates Each voxel is identified by a pair of coordinates, the distance of the voxel to the center of gravity of the cross-section The cube coordinates Additionally, a random defect distribution, inside a theoretical 40 mm edge-length specimen, was simulated through a Monte Carlo statistical model of Note that the circumferential test sums the frequencies of occurrence around the loading axis, since each sub-volume is similar to the part within the cube of a ring with a rectangular section. It is assumed that this information is relevant even for specimens that are not axi-symmetrical such as for cubes. In this section, the results of the CT-Scan are shown. Firstly, the results on the fiber distribution are presented. Secondly the results on the void distribution are presented by means of the 3D histograms of each specimen. Finally, the results are combined in 2D histograms in the As mentioned before, it was assumed that the flow of the fresh mix along the mold could lead to fiber orientation, which lead to identify the casting direction as the The columns in these histograms represent the relative frequencies of fibers within a range of angles. Frequencies of occurrence are taken relative to the total number of fibers in each cube (which were around 270 fibers per cube). For instance, The above study allows concluding that there should not be significant differences among the crack patterns due to the fiber distribution, since we always loaded the cubes along the casting direction. Fibers tend to lay horizontally with no preferential direction. Thus, the orientation, position and distribution of the fibers are similar in the average in all of the cubes used in this research. The 3D histograms plot the  On the other hand, Histograms of the specific cubes of the monotonic and cyclic series may be quite different from each other, even within cubes of the same series, although all of them clearly differ from the histograms of intact specimens or the artificially-generated ones. Comparison between all of the histograms at a glance can be easily performed by combining the frequencies of each of the dimensions of the annular sub-volumes, which yields 2D summed histograms along In order to analyze the results appropriately, the 3D histograms were summed in the  On the one hand, the intact series, On the other hand, the mean curves of the monotonic and cyclic series, represented by The comparison between the summed histograms of the monotonic series and the cyclic series is presented in The described results confirm the hypothesis followed by most fatigue models of convergence to the initial distribution, by which the compressive monotonic test is considered a particular case of the cyclic test, where the number of cycles resisted is only one. Additionally, These differences in damage concentration along the height of the cubes can also be verified in the original images obtained by the CT-Scan for the monotonically-loaded specimens, The CT-Scan technology reveals that the cracking in the specimens varies along the height of the specimen, which could be linked to the boundary conditions of the tests. Both monotonic and cyclic tests, performed in a servo-hydraulic machine equipped with a single spherical seat, result in a non-uniform distribution of the cracks along the height of the specimens. This concurs with the findings of del Viso et al. The representation of summed histograms in the The summed histograms in the The CT-Scan with specific post-processing software is a powerful tool to measure the internal damage of concrete and fiber-reinforced concrete specimens. In this work we used it to verify whether monotonic loading can be considered a limit case of fatigue loading, as it is axiomatically assumed by researchers in the fatigue of these materials. Naked-eye comparison of crack patterns generated by both types of loading usually leads to the conclusion that this assumption is correct. Still, the extension of the damage propagation or even some fracture mechanisms could vary with the type of loading. Furthermore, it is not evident that the extension of the cracking should be commensurate in both cases. These damage processes could leave a trace in the internal cracking pattern and thus they could be studied by a CT-Scan and a data processing technique. The material used in the study was a self-compacting steel fiber-reinforced concrete. Four series of 40 mm-edged cubes were prepared. One of them, comprised of 15 cubes, was used to obtain the average compressive strength. Eight cubes forming another series were tested under monotonic loading whereas 16 cubes were tested in low cycle fatigue loading, which comprised the monotonic and cyclic series respectively. Finally, another 8 cubes were kept intact so as to study the original fiber and pore distribution in the specimens. All the cubes of the latter three series were scanned to obtain their internal void distribution. Additionally, the intact series was used to study the fiber distribution and orientation; it was found that fibers are uniformly distributed but tend to lay horizontally with no preferential direction. As cubes were always loaded along the casting direction (vertical axis), it was concluded that there should not be significant differences among their crack patterns due to variations in the distribution and orientation of fibers among cubes. The images were processed with a novel methodology, especially developed by the authors for this research (named The study of the specimens transversal to the load direction shows that the voids of the intact specimens are randomly-distributed. On the contrary, the cracks of the tested specimens are not randomly-distributed, but they are rather concentrated on the external part of the cubes. Furthermore, the specimens tested under monotonic loading show, from a statistical point of view, the same crack pattern as the specimens tested under cyclic loading. In other words, 3D cracking patterns and corresponding volume generated in fiber-reinforced cubes monotonically tested in compression have the same average features and are commensurate with these of the same type of cubes but tested in fatigue. This demonstrates that internal micro-mechanisms of failure (crack nucleation and growth, crack distribution, etc.) due to monotonic static compressive tests are almost identical to the ones generated by low-cycle fatigue tests and, so, this confirms the hypothesis of convergence to the initial distribution, which assumes that compressive tests are a limit case of a cyclic test where failure is achieved in the first cycle. In addition, the transversal histograms were summed into three different thirds in height, which may reveal the effect of the boundary conditions of the tests in the crack pattern. Both histograms and direct images from the CT-Scan exhibit a non-uniform distribution of cracks along the height of the specimens. In the upper third of the cubes, close to the machine platen equipped with the spherical seat, the crack distribution is basically uniform, whereas in the bottom third, where the platen is fixed, the cracks are concentrated at the external part of the cube, close to the surfaces. However, the relative frequencies along the height remain constant. It should be emphasized that our conclusions are drawn from the tests in the paper and, thus, they limited to steel fiber-reinforced concrete under low cycle fatigue. However, Poveda et al. The authors are grateful for the financial support from the