The impact of different mill fracture mechanisms were examined for a wide range of densified biomass pellets to provide a comprehensive analysis of biomass milling behaviour for pulverised fuel combustion. The milling behaviour of 7 woody, herbaceous, fruit, and thermally treated densified biomasses were investigated for four distinct types of comminution fracture mechanism using traditional milling indices and novel application of 3D imaging techniques. For the coal mill trials, a reference coal was used to provide a milling performance comparator. For the pre-milled samples, woody and herbaceous pellets have the least spherical particles (φ 0.324–0.404), followed by thermally treated pellets (φ0.428), La Loma coal (φ 0.503), with olive cake having the most spherical particles (φ 0.562). This trend was noted for all the shape factors. Conventional comminution did not significantly impact biomass particle shape, even after a significant change in particle size. Therefore biomass pellet process history plays a key role in determining the comminuted particle shape. La Loma coal had significantly enhanced milling performance in comparison to the biomasses in the coal mills. Significant improvements in grindability and shape factors were observed for the thermally treated pellets. Mill choking was experienced for several of the woody and herbaceous samples, which resulted in a significant energy penalty. The mechanisms of mill choking were found to be intrinsically linked to the critical particle size of comminution through compression, particle shape factors, and the Stokes conditions set for the classifier and burners in pulverised fuel combustion systems. The study showed that for optimal milling performance, biomass pellets should be composed of particles which meet the Stokes requirements of the mill classifier. This would minimise the potential for mill choking and milling energy penalties, and ensure maximum mill throughput.diameter of a circumscribed sphere around a particle (μm) particle aspect ratio (dimensionless) circularity of a particle (dimensionless) diameter of a sphere of the same volume as a particle (μm) Rosin-Rammler characteristic particle size (μm) feed particle size (d product particle size (d particle size at 80th percentile of cumulative distribution (μm) area equivalent diameter of a particle (μm) perimeter equivalent diameter of a particle (μm) shortest chord diameter (μm) maximum Feret diameter (μm) total effective specific energy (kW higher heating value (J/g) dry higher heating value (J/g) Von Rittinger constant (dimensionless) moisture content (%) mass of sample in milling tests (g) Rosin-Rammler size distribution parameter (dimensionless) instantaneous power consumption (kW) average idle power consumption (kW) Rosin-Rammler cumulative percentage undersize mass (%) distance from the centre of area of the borders in measuring direction (μm) symmetry of a particle (dimensionless) time (s) sphericity of a particle (dimensionless) Biomass is the biggest source of renewable energy in the EU and is expected to make a significant contribution to the 20% EU renewable energy target by 2020 Legislation to reduce Nitrogen Oxide (NO In order to improve the bulk density for transportation, biomass is often milled to a coarse particle size then pelletized The aim of this study was to quantify the impact of different mill types commonly used in power generation on the milling behaviour and physical characteristics of several densified biomasses. This is the first study which investigates and compares the milling behaviour of woody, herbaceous, fruit, and thermally treated densified biomasses, along with a reference coal for the two coal mill tests, using four distinct types of comminution fracture mechanism. In addition, for the first time the impact of different milling operations on the operational sphericity of biomass particles has been assessed, and the paper demonstrates how this relates to the conditions used to select particles for combustion in full scale mills, particularly in relation to common mill operation issues such as mill choking, and the process history of the biomass pellets. The samples used ( Moisture content was measured in accordance with BS EN 14774-1:2009 The particle size range of the biomass particles (prior to densification) was obtained using the BS EN 16126:2012 Four different mills were used as part of this study; a planetary ball mill, Bond ball mill, knife mill, and ring-roller mill. The mills are off-the-shelf unmodified laboratory mills, with the exception of the ring-roller mill, which is a bespoke one-off laboratory test mill. The planetary ball mill is a batch process without classification, the Bond ball mill uses the BWI methodology Energy consumption was recorded using an Elcomponent SPC Pro for the knife mill and ring-roller mill. The total specific energy was calculated by integrating the Power-Time curve obtained from the data logger and then dividing by the material mass A standard Retsch PM100 planetary ball mill was used for the planetary ball milling trials with a 500 A standard Bico Ball Mill was used to conduct the standard BWI test on a range of biomasses and sample coal A standard Retsch SM300 knife mill was used for the knife mill trials. The SM300 knife mill has a 3 The Lopulco LM 1.6 is a laboratory scale continuous throughput ring-roller mill which has not previously been reported in biomass milling literature. The mill is a bespoke one-off experimental test mill and is around 40 Particle size distributions were determined by sieving the milled product in accordance with BS EN 15149-2:2010 The Rosin-Rammler distribution equation was originally developed to describe the distribution of coal fines from coal mills Particle shape analysis was conducted on a Retsch Camsizer® P4. The Retsch Camsizer P4 measuring system is based on 3D digital imaging processing The results of the particle shape characteristics are based on the shortest chord diameter ( The measured sphericity is the operational sphericity as defined by Krumbein and Sloss The results of the milling trials provide a comprehensive overview and novel insight into the diverse range of milling behaviours of different densified biomasses. Due to extensive nature of the results presented, they are categorised firstly by material group, followed by commonalities and variances in milling behaviour, the mechanisms of mill choking, and the implications of the results on future milling research and full scale milling operations. The milling results are summarised in The most notable overall result is the incredibly high milling energy for the BWI test, which is detailed in a previous publication by the authors The mixed wood and eucalyptus pellets fall within the woody category of biomass according to BS Sunflower and miscanthus pellets fall into the herbaceous biomass group according to BS EN 17225-1 Olive cake is a fruit biomass according to BS EN 17225-1 The steam exploded and microwave pellets fall into the thermally treated biomass group, and show the most dissimilar results to any other group. The microwave pellets proved to be hydrophobic during the pellet disintegration test, and retained their original size and shape with no swelling. This implies that the microwave thermal treatment has resulted in a fundamental change in the structure of the material. Unlike the other pellets, the microwave pellets are composed of material which has been permanently fused together by the microwave process. Unfortunately no data on the pre-densified particle size distributions was available for the microwaved pellets. The thermally treated pellets showed the lowest energy consumptions of all the biomasses ( La Loma coal was tested in the ring-roller and BWI mill to provide a benchmark against which the performance of the biomasses could be compared. It had the lowest energy consumption (4.8 Each of the mills in this study used a different fracture mechanism for particle size reduction ( The dry higher heating value ( The particle shape factors provide novel insights into the milling behaviour of biomass and coal. The BWI test observed significantly higher specific effective energy consumption for several of the samples (mixed wood pellets 413 The mechanisms of mill choking can be linked to the fracture mechanisms used in the mills and the material fracturing properties. Coal is a brittle material and fractures originate from stress-activated flaws, and in practice different particle sizes break at different rates In contrast to coal, biomass does not have an inherent crack system. Wood is an orthotropic material and has two or three mutually orthogonal twofold axes of rotational symmetry, resulting in anisotropic mechanical properties The results of this study indicate that the planetary bill mill can give an indicative value for the critical particle size of comminution for biomass. When the This study has several major implications for future milling research and biomass comminution in full scale mills. The study has shown that there will be little change in a biomass particle’s shape unless it chokes within the mill. As conventional milling leads to no significant change in the particle shape factors, the process history of the biomass is fundamental in influencing the comminuted particle shape; this will play a leading role in determining its ability to pass an aerodynamic barrier. The other key parameter is the materials critical particle size of comminution for which, where biomasses are concerned, there is no data currently, and research is required in this area in order to gain greater insight into biomass milling. Thus, for biomasses to be used in pulverised fuel combustion systems knowledge of these two parameters is fundamental for optimal milling and combustion. The comparison to La Loma coal milling performance highlights that when the milling of biomass particles is required, there will be a significant reduction in milling performance. To mitigate this, pellets should be composed of particles of the correct size and shape to pass through the classifier, and thus milling will only need to break down the weak pellet bonds. This would eliminate the issue of mill choking, minimise the milling energy penalty, and ensure maximum mill throughput. Beyond this, the pre-densified particle shape factors can be used in turn to inform CFD models, which can then inform classifier set up and pellet specifications. This would allow for CFD combustion models to be more closely linked to experimental milling and combustion research. The correlation between particle size and shape in laboratory scale milling trials is of paramount importance in understanding its applicability to full scale systems. This paper provides a comprehensive overview of the milling behaviour of a wide range of densified biomasses in different mills. The comminution of densified biomass is intrinsically linked to the raw material composition, comminution behaviour, and milled product characteristics. The pre-densified particle size and pre-densified particle shape are determined by the process history of densified biomass; these two key factors will control the comminution behaviour. This study uniquely observed that comminution does not significantly impact biomass particle shape even when there is a significant change in particle size, and thus the process history of biomass pellets determines the comminuted particle shape. For the pre-milled samples, woody and herbaceous pellets have the least spherical particles (φ 0.324–0.404), followed by the thermally treated pellets (φ 0.428), La Loma coal (φ 0.503), with olive cake having the most spherical particles (φ 0.562). The study indicated that the most effective fracture mechanism is dependent upon the material, and is linked to the target size of the mill, as well as the ability of the material to reach that size. La Loma coal had significantly enhanced milling performance in the ring-roller and BWI mills due to the favourable fracture mechanisms employed in these mills for brittle materials. In order to compensate for this when using biomass pellets, care should be taken to ensure that the pellets are composed of particles of the correct size and shape to pass through the classifier. Comminution would therefore only need application to breaking down the weak bonds formed during the pellet making process. The consequences of this would be maximising mill throughput and increasing the energy potential of the fuels. A common operational issue experienced with densified biomass is mill choking. This study identified that the mechanisms of mill choking are intrinsically linked to the critical particle size of comminution through compression, particle shape factors, and the Stokes conditions set for a pulverised fuel combustion system’s classifier and burners. Particles will not significantly change shape until this critical particle size is met, after which the only mode of size reduction available is through attrition, leading to slower comminution, and induced mill choking. As a consequence, steady state milling cannot be achieved, resulting in poor milling performance and a significant energy penalty on the fuel; for an energy generator this results in a loss of potential power generation. Currently no data exists on the critical particle size for comminution of biomass. Further research is required to determine this for commonly used biomasses and the impact this has on the milling of densified biomass in relation to their process history. This research is funded and supported by the Biomass & Fossil Fuel Research Alliance (BF2RA), EDF Energy plc, and the