The major running cost derived from the operation of venturi scrubbers is pressure drop. In the present study, the predictions of different models are compared to experimental data from venturi scrubbers of different sizes (throat diameter from 1.9 to 16cm), geometries, operating variables and liquid injection arrangements. As a result, it is concluded that most of the models must be used with caution. Much attention must be paid to the validity of the assumptions employed in the mathematical models. The equations proposed by Calvert [Scrubbing, Air Pollution, 3rd Edition, Vol. IV, Academic Press, New York, 1982], Yung et al. [JAPCA 27 (1977) 348] or Hesketh [Atomization and cloud behaviour in wet scrubbers, in: Proceedings of the US–USSR Symposium Control Fine Particulate Emissions 1974, San Francisco, 15–18 January 1974] produce good results only in very specific situations. The model proposed by Boll [Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam. 12 (1973) 40] is simple, easy to compute and agrees reasonably well with the experimental data. Unfortunately, it cannot predict the effect of different liquid injection arrangements. The model by Azzopardi and coworkers [Filtr. Sep. 21 (1984) 196; Trans. IchemE. 69B (1991) 237; Chem Eng. J. 67 (1997) 9] was the only one to give good predictions for all the range of variables studied. On the other hand, this model is not simple and requires from the engineer an additional effort in terms of computation. In order to apply this model to the rectangular geometry, the concept of hydraulic equivalent diameter was used.Regulations controlling the emissions of pollutants into the atmosphere are becoming more and more strict. In order to accomplish with these constraints the development of new technologies is necessary, as well as the improvement of those already existing. One of most efficient devices for the removal of very small particles from gaseous streams is the venturi scrubber All these advantages are obscured by a very high running cost in terms of pressure drop The estimation of pressure drop in venturi scrubbers is not trivial. The engineer can find equations and techniques developed during the last three decades. Some of these equations can lead to errors as high as 100%, as will be shown later. More sophisticated models give better results, but they require an investment in terms of time and computational effort. The objective of this work is to describe and evaluate the most important models available for the prediction of pressure drop in venturi scrubbers. Special attention has been paid to the assumptions of each model in order to justify the validity of the equations under different circumstances. In addition, experimental data is compared to the predictions of these models, covering a variety of situations and operating conditions. The present authors directly collected part of the experimental data of pressure drop, while the rest was obtained from published literature. A venturi scrubber is constituted of three main parts ( Azzopardi and Govan (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) The relative importance of all these terms depends on the specific situation. In general, the energy lost due to mechanisms (c) and (e) is relatively small when compared to the others. These terms can be neglected with no significant error. In situations of practical interest mechanism (b) accounts for 50–85% of total pressure drop. As this is usually the main mechanism, it is not surprising that some models only include the pressure drop spent in the acceleration of the drops. Mechanism (d) can be very significant if the section of the venturi is small or the quantity of water atomised low. This last situation is likely to occur when the liquid to gas ratio is low or most of the liquid is flowing as a film. This is not unusual in laboratory-scale and pilot-scale venturi scrubbers, particularly when liquid is introduced as a film  The equation developed by Calvert The acceleration of drops at the throat is the main term of pressure drop. The other mechanisms discussed, plus the acceleration and deceleration of drops in the divergence can be neglected. All the liquid introduced is atomised into drops. There is no mass exchange between phases. All the drops have no initial axial velocity. Drops reach the velocity of the gas at some point in the throat. The velocity of the gas in the throat is constant. The flow is one-dimensional, incompressible and adiabatic. Following these assumptions, a momentum balance for a differential of volume in the throat gives New equations were proposed starting from Calvert’s model The model of Yung et al. Using the correlation proposed by Hollands and Goel Leith et al. The correlation proposed by Hesketh Boll His model assumes three of the five mechanisms previously discussed, namely acceleration of the gas, acceleration of drops and friction wall-gas. From the assumption of a one-dimensional flow he proposed this differential equation for the momentum balance along the scrubber: It can be observed from The integration of Although the model proposed by Boll The model of Azzopardi and coworkers The main feature in this model is the exchange of liquid between film and gas core. New drops are continuously stripped off from the film, called entrainment, while other drops are deposited onto the film. Taking this into account they were able to develop mass balances for film and liquid in the core, being able to estimate the split film-gas core at each position along the scrubber. Their mass balance on the film leads to The initial flow of film is introduced as a parameter into the model, and it will depend on the liquid injection arrangement. From this point the model is able to calculate the fluxes of entrainment and deposition by means of equations of this kind Additionally, their model allows for the existence of drops of different sizes depending on the point and manner they were created. The velocities of the drops are different for each group Azzopardi et. al. This model represents the flow in a venturi scrubber quite realistically. On the other hand, it requires many equations and needs more complicated algorithms than those models presented so far. A detailed description of this model can be found in the work of Pulley This phenomenological model and some of its intrinsic correlations were developed specifically for the cylindrical geometry and therefore its authors do not recommend its application to rectangular venturi scrubbers. In this paper, however, a concept of The inlet, throat and outlet diameters are the equivalent hydraulic diameter of the inlet, throat and outlet rectangular cross-sections, that is, equal to four times the cross-section area divided by its perimeter. The gas and liquid flow through the HEV is such as to maintain the same throat gas velocity and volumetric liquid-to-gas ratio as in the rectangular venturi. Other models and equations are available in order to calculate pressure drop in venturi scrubbers. Among those, the model proposed by Viswanathan et al. In order to evaluate correctly the different models it appears necessary to compare them against empirical data from venturi scrubbers of different sizes, liquid injection systems and operating conditions. Experimental results of pressure drop obtained by the present authors in their laboratories, together with data presented in other works has been collected for this purpose. In order to measure quantitatively the performance of a model, two simple performance indexes were defined. The first index, called deviation index, is a measure of how close the model predictions are to the experimental values, on an average. If The experimental data of Gonçalves et al. In a small venturi when liquid is introduced as a film the fraction of water atomised is typically as low as 5–25%. The model of Azzopardi and coworkers The good predictions of the model of Yung et al. As it has been noted, the pressure loss due to friction gas-wall, or gas-film, is quite significant in small-scale venturi scrubbers. This last conclusion appears very clearly observing The models of Azzopardi and coworkers  The experimental results from Yung et al. The model proposed by Calvert The empirical correlation proposed by Hesketh The model proposed by Yung et al. Once again you can see that the model of Boll Boll The model of Azzopardi and coworkers  As the diameter of the venturi increases, the mechanism of pressure drop due to drop acceleration becomes more predominant. Both in the case of jet injection and film injection the fraction of water flowing as a film is quite low, usually below 10% for a scrubber of this size. Although the hypothesis of the equation of Calvert Hesketh  Besides the rectangular geometry, this venturi was characterised by its small size and low amount of liquid utilised. Under these conditions, friction is the most important mechanism for the total pressure loss of the equipment. Through the use of Boll’s model The models of Calvert The models of Boll From this analysis it can be concluded: The geometric characteristics of the equipment must be considered. An equation like the one proposed by Calvert The fraction of liquid atomised is an important parameter to take into account. The fraction of water flowing as film depends on the liquid injection arrangement and the flow conditions. Only the model by Azzopardi and coworkers Empirical correlations are not valid for the whole range of operating conditions of practical interest. The model of Azzopardi and coworkers The scale of the venturi influences the relative importance of the different mechanisms producing pressure drop. For the engineer, in a practical case we suggest: Not to use the equation by Calvert The model proposed by Yung et al. If the fraction of liquid atomised is high (>75%), which should happen normally in venturi scrubbers of medium and higher scale with liquid introduced as jets, the model proposed by Boll When it is necessary a general model that would give acceptable results for cylindrical venturi scrubbers in all operational conditions and would rarely underestimate pressure drop it is necessary to use the model of Azzopardi and coworkers area of the section of the throat (m drag coefficient used by Yung concentration of drops (kg/m equivalent diameter in the model of Azzopardi and Govan, taking into account film thickness (m) drop diameter (m) equivalent diameter of the duct (m) friction factor used in the calculation of the shear stress gas/wall flux of deposition of liquid onto the film (kg/m flux of liquid entrained from film (kg/m volumetric flow of gas (m volumetric fraction of drops of group volumetric fraction of gas hydraulic equivalent venturi scrubber constant of mass transfer in volumetric flow of liquid (m mass ratio liquid/gas pressure (Pa) velocity of drops at end of throat (m/s) velocity of drops (m/s) velocity of drops of group velocity of gas at end of diffuser (m/s) velocity of gas at throat (m/s) velocity of gas (m/s) mass flow of film (kg/s) distance along axis of the venturi (m) dimensionless parameter of throat dimensionless parameter in density of gas (kg/m density of liquid (kg/m shear stress at the interface gas/film (N/m J.A.S. Gonçalves, M.A. Martins Costa and J.R. Coury gratefully acknowledges the financial support from CNPq and Pronex-Finep.