Zirconium carbide-based biomorphic ceramics have been manufactured by vacuum infiltration of zirconium-oxychloride (ZrOCl2·8H2O) sol into natural wood. After vacuum-assisted infiltration, the specimens were dried in air and pyrolysed at 800°C in Ar-atmosphere. The infiltration and drying process were repeated up to four times. Finally, the specimens were hold at 1550°C in a vacuum furnace to form ZrC. The results of the process of synthesis have been studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). For evaluating the yield of the synthesis, a new method by Fourier transform infrared spectrometry (FTIR) has been developed for the direct determination of ZrC by absorbance measurements in KBr pellets. The procedure was based on the use of the ratio between the absorbance of the characteristic band of zirconium carbide and those of an oxalate internal standard added to samples. A multivariate calibration strategy based on inverse least squares and the standard addition approach was employed for quantification. The results obtained for all ZrC-ceramics studied were satisfactorily compared with those obtained by X-ray diffractometry (XRD). The proposed method was also applied to the analysis of synthetic samples prepared by mixing pyrolyzed wood with ZrC, the results indicated good recovery in all instances.ZrC as one of ultra-high temperature ceramics, combines the characteristics properties of metals and ceramics due to ionic, covalent, and metallic bonding simultaneously in its NaCl-type lattice structure. ZrC exhibits various outstanding physical and chemical properties, such as high hardness, high melting point, high corrosion and wear resistance, solid-state phase stability as well as chemical stability. Hence, ZrC has been considered a good potential material for ultra-high temperature applications Generally, ZrC powders can be economically produced through reacting power mixtures of carbon (C) and zirconium metal (Zr), zirconium hydride (ZrH In recent years, a new type of porous ceramic materials with specific functional properties and structures by mimicking the hierarchical cellular structure of wood has attained particular interest. These ceramic materials, called biomorphic ceramics, show at low density excellent mechanical properties such as high-strength, stiffness, toughness, good oxidation and corrosion resistance, high-thermal conductivity, and good thermal shock resistance. While in biological growth and mineralization processes only very slow material synthesis rates occur, biotemplating techniques, in which biological materials are used directly as template structures for high-temperature conversion into technical ceramic materials, overcome this time rate problem The sol–gel method is one of the newer methods for synthesizing ceramic materials, owing to low cost, no troublesome procedure, and allowing lower temperatures of synthesis. The synthesis of biomorphic TiC and ZrC-carbides from wood templates by infiltration of Ti- and Zr-alkoxides has been reported by Rambo et al. FTIR is a rapid analytical technique that provides information about the qualitative composition of samples. However, quantitative analysis by FTIR requires the use of cells of known thickness and, in general, a previous dilution of the sample with a suitable solvent, limitations which often preclude the general application of this technique to quantitative determinations. In recent years, a series of simple models for carrying out quantitative determinations from infrared data, which do not require the use of a known absorption pathlength, have been described In a previous work we reported Analytical reagent grade chemicals were used throughout. Potassium bromide, and disodium oxalate were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) and zirconium carbide (99.5%, w/w) from Aldrich Chemie (Steinheim, Germany). Zirconia sol was obtained from zirconium oxychloride (ZrOCl Different kinds of biomorphic ceramics derived from natural woods (oak, beech, lime and cherry-wood) were prepared for the sol–gel infiltration process. The preparation of the samples was based on a procedure described by Rambo et al. Rectangular specimens (3 The processing scheme is summarized in The content of zirconium carbide in the samples was monitored by FTIR and X-ray diffractometry (XRD, D 500, Siemens, Kar-lsruhe, Germany). The infrared spectroscopic measurements were carried out using a Shimadzu Model 8300 Fourier transform infrared spectrometer. The spectra were recorded in the range 2000–500 A Lenton Tube furnace, model LTF 16/180, was employed for the synthesis of biomorphic ceramics. The cellular microstructures of the biomorphic ceramics were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL, JFM 840) operated at 20 KBr pellets were prepared by mixing different accurately weighted amounts from 0.00 to 2.50 The spectra were recorded from 2000 to 500 In this paper, the standard addition method using an internal standard was used as described by us in a previous work In our case the instrumental response are the quotients between the peak area corresponding to ZrC (1383 According to Rambo et al. The cellular microstructure of the biomorphic ceramics is shown in XRD has been used for the study of the composition of the samples. As an example, the XRD pattern of biomorphic ceramic from beech is shown in   Absorbance measurements in the solid phase are usually affected by levels of noise larger than those found in homogenous solution due to the presence of the solid support, which causes a strong attenuation of the light intensity reaching the detector. Thus, a careful study of the instrumental parameters and conditions of measurement was carried out in order to obtain as good as possible signal-to-noise ratio, which would then ensure satisfactorily reproducible data. The ZrC band at 1383 A systematic study of the effect of the nominal resolution and the number of accumulated scans was performed under the aforementioned conditions. The number of accumulated scans per spectrum was changed from 20 to 250, and the nominal resolution varied from 0.05 to 32 Due to the darkness of the KBr disks of the biomorphic ceramics, the amount of sample for preparing the disk and the total weight of the pellet had to be optimized; the amount of biomorphic ceramics was varied from 0.5 to 2.5 The KBr disks of the biomorphic ceramics are darker than those of pure ZrC, and so a method of external calibration could not be possible, being necessary use standard additions. Simple linear regression (SLR) and multiple linear regression (MLR) were proved with each of the three ratios of areas chosen between the analyte and the internal standard, obtaining the best results with the MLR method. Calibration lines were prepared by addition of 0.00–2.50 The results obtained for all biomorphic ceramics studied ( The results presented in this paper for ZrC in biomorphic ceramics show that FTIR using the ratio of absorbance peak areas between the analyte and a reference compound, provides accurate results for the determination of this compound in the samples without the need to use cells with a known optical pathlength. This method can be used satisfactorily in the evaluation of the quality of the processes of synthesis of these new materials because the preparation of these samples as KBr pellets is the simplest and the most rapid form to realize these analyses; so as to allow its applicability in the industrial field, where short times are always a priority. The authors thank the