Introduction
                  Treatment of long segment proximal humeral fractures with extension below the surgical neck into the diaphysis remains a significant challenge for orthopaedic surgeons. The purpose of this paper was to evaluate the clinical and radiological outcomes following primary long-stem RSA with cerclage fixation for complex long segment proximal humeral fractures with diaphyseal extension in patients more than 65 years old.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Between February 2010 and March 2013, 22 patients who suffered a complex proximal humerus fracture with extended diaphyseal involvement underwent surgery with long-stem RSA and cerclages fixation. There were 17 female and 5 male patients, and the mean age was 77.2 years at time of surgery (range 65–84 years). All patients had a 3 or 4-part proximal humerus fracture or a two part fracture with a split of humeral head, with extension to the proximal diaphysis. Clinical and radiographic follow-up was performed on all 22 patients at 6 weeks, at 3, 6, and 12 months postoperatively, and then at 2 years. Clinical evaluation consisted of the shoulder rating Constant scale. X ray evaluation was done to evaluate fracture healing and eventually humeral and glenoid component loosening or other complications.
               
                  Results
                  No infections were reported, neither other serious complications. Two patients developed a seroma and one patient developed chronic pain at that was treated with referral to pain management. No patients were lost at follow-up. At final follow-up, average active elevation was 132.5° (range 100°–140°), external rotation 30° (range 55°–10°). Average abduction was 120° (range 90°–135°). The mean adjusted Constant score was 72/100 (range 64–82). All fractures were healed within 3 months after surgery. No loosening of the humeral or glenoid components and no episodes of dislocation/instability were observed in this series. We did not observe scapular notching in any patient on the x-ray at most recent follow-up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Long-stem RSA with cerclages wire fixation represents a viable treatment option for complex long-segment displaced proximal humerus fractures with diaphyseal extension in patients older than 65 years. Our results suggest clinical outcomes at two years of follow up are satisfactory with an acceptable complication rate.Indications for reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) have continued to evolve since the modern Grammont RSA was developed more than 20 years ago. In particular, multiple recent studies have examined the outcomes of RSA for treatment of acute, comminuted proximal humeral fractures particularly in elderly patients Treatment of complex long segment proximal humeral fractures with extension to the shaft can be particularly challenging in elderly patients and/or patient with poor bone quality. In these cases, the use of locking plates may be associated with primary screw cutout, malunion, nonunion, avascular necrosis and a poor functional outcome In the period between February 2010 and March 2013, 22 patients who suffered a complex proximal humerus fracture with extended diaphyseal involvement underwent surgery with long-stem RSA and cerclage fixation. Fifteen patients were directly admitted to our emergency room from the scene of accident, whereas another 7 patients were referred from nearby hospitals. Surgical procedure was carried-out by two surgeons at two different institutions (SGK and RG). Patients underwent the operative treatment in a period between 5 days and 14 days after trauma. There were 17 female and 5 male patients, and the mean age was 77.2 years at time of surgery (range 65–84 years). Pre-operatively, all patients had plain radiographs and computed tomography (CT) for further evaluation and classification of the injury. Bilateral full-length scaled radiographs of the humerus were performed to template the approximate height of the prosthesis for insertion. All these patients but four had a 3 or 4 part proximal humerus fracture or a two part fracture with a split of humeral head ( Clinical and radiographic follow-up was performed on all 22 patients at 6 weeks, at 3, 6, and 12 months postoperatively, and then at 2 years. Clinical evaluation consisted of the shoulder rating Constant scale adjusted for age and sex This work has been approved by the appropriate ethical committees related to the institutions in which it was performed and all subjects gave informed consent to be included in this study. All surgeries were performed in a modified beach chair position on a standard operating room table with the head elevated between 20–30 degrees and the ipsilateral scapula supported. An extended deltopectoral approach was used in all cases. The biceps tendon was tenodesed to the upper border of the pectoralis major in all cases. After removal of the humeral head fragment, four no. 5 non-absorbable sutures are placed through the infraspinatus and teres minor at the bone-tendon junction to control the greater tuberosity fragment. The lesser tuberosity and attached subscapularis is then identified and tagged for later repair around the prosthesis. We then proceed with implantation of the glenosphere in a standard fashion. We aim to place the glenosphere low on the glenoid face, with the starting hole being around 12 After implantation of the glenosphere, the diaphyseal fracture fragments are identified and a humeral trial is then placed down the medullary canal to its appropriate depth. As general rule, we aim to implant a humeral stem that bypasses the most distal aspect of the diaphyseal fracture extension by a distance equal to at least twice the diameter of the diaphysis. The appropriate length of the stem can be verified with fluoroscopy if necessary. Regarding determination of the appropriate height of the humeral implant, many techniques have been previously described for this Humeral version was then set by placing the arm in a neutral position at the side and pointing the humeral component/tray toward the glenosphere. If a version rod is ever used we prefer to cement the humeral component in 10 degrees of retroversion. Prior to cementation of the humeral component, drill holes are placed on either side of the bicipital groove and a 3 Postoperatively, patients are placed in a sling for six weeks. Active motion of elbow, wrist and hand was start the day after surgery. After 7 days passive motion of shoulder was started with flexion to 90 degrees. At 3 weeks passive external rotation to 30 degrees was introduced. Full passive and active-assisted motion in all planes was initiated at week 7. At this time the use of arm for light home activities was allowed. No intraoperative complications were observed. No cases of superficial or deep infections were observed. Two patients developed a seroma that was treated with aspiration trough the previous surgical incision in the office setting ( At final follow-up, the majority of patients were pain free at rest and during activities; only 3 patients reported occasional pain (VAS 3-4) during prolonged arm activities. Average active elevation was 132.5° (range 100°–140°), external rotation 30° (range 55°–10°). Average abduction was 120° (range 90°–135°). The mean adjusted Constant score was 72/100 (range 64–82). The worst clinical outcomes were observed in two cases in which the greater tuberosity underwent resorption. No loosening of the humeral or glenoid components and no episodes of dislocation/instability were observed in this series. No cases of acromial stress fracture or nerve palsy were observed. We did not observe scapular notching in any patient on the x-ray at most recent follow-up. The goal of this study was to evaluate the outcomes of following treatment of complex long segment proximal humerus fractures with diaphyseal extension using long-stem RSA with cerclage fixation in patients older than 65 years. In our series, all 22 patients sustained a 3 or 4-part proximal humerus fracture with diaphyseal extension. At a minimum follow-up of 24 months all fractures were healed and no cases of prosthetic loosening or dislocation were observed. Range of motion and Constant scores were acceptable. No major complications requiring reoperation occurred. No patients were lost to follow-up. Complex long segment proximal humeral fractures with diaphyseal extension in patients older than 65 years are very rare injuries and difficult to treat. Very often these injuries occur in patients with poor bone quality and significant comminution. Satisfactory outcomes have been reported with locking plate fixation of these injuries in younger patients This study does have several weakness. This series represents a very small sample of patients performed in a retrospective fashion without a control group. Such studies are merely observational in nature and prone to significant bias. With the lack of a control group for comparison, these results are not necessarily generalizable to a larger population of patients. In addition, the patients included for analysis were operated on by two different surgeons which may predispose to subtle differences in the execution of key components of the procedure that otherwise may have affected the final outcome. Further studies should be completed to evaluate this technique vis à vis other methods for treatment of complex long segment proximal humerus fractures with diaphyseal extension in patients older than 65 years of age. In conclusion, we believe that long-stem RSA with cerclage wire fixation represents a potential treatment option for complex long-segment displaced proximal humerus fractures with diaphyseal extension in patients older that 65 years. Our results suggest clinical outcomes at two years of follow up are satisfactory with an acceptable complication rate. We feel that pre-operative counselling is paramount when approaching these rare injuries and that all patients should be informed before surgery that recovery of function is slow and maximum functional outcomes may take between 12–18 months to achieve. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.