The wastewater produced after brightening and anodizing aluminium has high concentrations of phosphates and sulphates. The addition of MgO in a first physico-chemical wastewater treatment step makes the selective recovery of phosphates in the form of magnesium phosphates feasible, which may be reused as fertilizer. The proposed wastewater treatment process allows manufacturers to reduce more than 70% of the volume of the precipitate in the sedimentation reactor and more than 50% of the weight of the final disposal sludge. In this study, the use of an alternative low-grade MgO (LG-MgO) as a source of magnesium, which is cheaper than pure MgO, is investigated. The phosphate concentration and pH of the treated wastewater is controlled by the formation and precipitation of newberyite or bobierrite as a function of the magnesium source added. According to experimental data, a reaction mechanism is proposed. Although LG-MgO reacts more slowly than pure MgO and it is necessary to add 3–4 times the stoichiometric amount, this procedure has considerable economic and technical advantages.Anodizing has greatly extended the applications of aluminium in products and uses where the metal might otherwise not be utilized. The process provides a much thicker oxide coating, several microns thick if required, improving the corrosion resistance, abrasion resistance, and overall appearance of aluminium. Adequate cleaning and rinsing are the first required process operations. Deoxidizing would normally be the next step. Using an acid solution and a somewhat elevated temperature, the purpose of deoxidizing is to remove non-uniform oxide films present on the surface of aluminium and other contaminants not dissolved by the soak cleaner. Deoxidizers are typically mixtures of mineral acids. The mixture selectively attacks the metal surface protrusions, resulting in an overall levelling effect. After that, the aluminium follows either an etching process, in order to remove the natural shine, providing a soft, matte, texture appearance, or a brightening process. For brightening, a mixture of acid solutions, nitric (3–6%), sulphuric (10–20%) and phosphoric (80–85%), are usually used prior to anodizing, resulting in a mirror-shiny surface. Anodizing is usually carried out in a nominal 15–17% sulphuric acid solution at 21–27 As a result of the process described, the wastewater obtained after the production in bulk of anodized aluminium contains high amounts of phosphates and sulphates, nitrates and, to a somewhat less degree, aluminium, as well as a very low pH. In order to be able to reuse these waters or to discharge them properly, the ions must be removed in a physico-chemical treatment plant. Moreover, phosphate is recognized as being one of the resources that will be scarce in the near future. So, it is of value to recover most of the phosphate from the liquid waste. The removal of phosphorus has been widely studied and, at present, two effective and reliable methods have been established: chemical precipitation and biological removal ( Nevertheless, as a consequence of the fact that magnesium phosphates have a very low solubility (p Furthermore, in wastewaters with high phosphate and sulphate contents like those obtained in the anodizing aluminium process, while the use of lime precipitates phosphates and sulphates together, the use of MgO allows selective precipitation of the phosphate without the presence of sulphates, since magnesium sulphate is very soluble (about 250 While the use of MgO for the removal and recovery of phosphates would be technically feasible for the treatment of high-strength wastewater, it is not adopted economically because of the high cost of magnesium compounds ( In the present study, experiments to remove the phosphates from anodizing aluminium wastewaters are performed using LG-MgO. The physico-chemical wastewater treatment studied at laboratory scale is depicted in This study was carried out with wastewater from the anodized processing of aluminium to produce spray pumps that are used in cosmetic and pharmaceutical markets. Nowadays, the process generates 4 Analytical grade MgO and LG-MgO were used as a source of magnesium. The LG-MgO used is produced and sold by Magnesitas Navarras, S.A. located in Navarra (Spain). It comes from the calcination in rotary kiln at 1100 The experiment trials were performed using a flocculation tester that consists of six 400 The precipitates obtained were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) analyser, to determine the different compounds formed and to elucidate a possible reaction mechanism. According to the values described in The initial wastewater has a phosphorous (P– The effects of S/L ratio and time on the concentration of phosphorous and pH is depicted in In Based on the literature ( In contrast, the solutions resulting from the addition of LG-MgO show undersaturation with respect to bobierrite, as expected from their low pH. This was borne out by the fact that bobierrite was not detected and newberyite (PDI 35-0780) was identified as the main mineral phase in the XRD patterns in the sludge obtained from experiments of LG-MgO addition ( Magnesite –MgCO This fact has been corroborated by SEM/EDS microanalysis performed on sludge particles. It can be observed in the micrograph shown in According to these results, a hypothetical reaction mechanism is proposed to illustrate phosphate removal, using LG-MgO as source of magnesium. At the beginning, the Nernst boundary layer interface involving solid particles is formed and hydrolysis of MgO surface takes place. The solubility equilibrium of Mg(OH) The particle size distribution of the obtained sludge using LG-MgO as magnesium source shows a mean diameter ( On the other hand, all XRD patterns of precipitates obtained by adding pure MgO to wastewater show only the presence of poorly crystalline brucite and amorphous phases. This fact suggests that magnesium phosphate precipitates from the bulk of solution and the pH is controlled by the solubility of brucite. Likewise, the analysis of particle size distribution of the precipitate formed shows a mean particle size smaller than 15 In both experimental trials adding LG-MgO and pure MgO, and for all S/L ratios, the concentration of sulphate remained practically constant around the initial concentration ( In a second step, the sulphate was removed by adding limewash (S/L=1:4) to the filtrate obtained in the first step. The addition of limewash was carried out until the pH was 12 to ensure the total precipitation. The volume of decanted precipitates and the weight of dry and wet sludge, filtered from clarified solution, were compared with that which was obtained at the same pH without the previous selective removal of the phosphate. Independent of the source of MgO added in the first step, the previous recovery of phosphate allowed reduction of more than 70% of the volume of precipitate in the sedimentation reactor and more than 50% of the weight of the final disposal sludge. It is possible to recover phosphate selectively from wastewater containing phosphate and sulphate by means of a previous magnesium phosphate precipitation in a physico-chemical treatment plant. In the first step, the magnesium phosphate is precipitated by adding MgO as neutralizing agent with the sulphate remaining in the solution. In the second step, the sulphate contained in the filtered solution is removed by adding limewash to form gypsum. As a source of magnesium, it is possible to use a low-grade MgO (LG-MgO), which is much cheaper than pure MgO. According to the results obtained at laboratory scale, adding 24 Taking into account the composition of the LG-MgO and the formed newberyite, the obtained sludge during the removal of the phosphates from wastewater can be used as raw material as a source of phosphate and magnesium. According to the results obtained in this study, a batch physico-chemical pilot plant using the precipitation process described here will be installed for treating anodizing aluminium wastewater. The authors would like to thank the Magnesitas Navarras S.A. for its cooperation in financing and supporting the work. The authors also express their thanks to the Scientific and Technical Services of the University of Barcelona for analytical assistance.