Quantitative structure–activity/property relationship (QSAR/QSPR) studies are mathematical quantification of relations between structure and activity or property. These are extensively used in pharmaceutical and agricultural chemistry for screening potential compounds for specific biological activity and also in environmental toxicology. The linear or nonlinear regression models that establish a relation between the structure and the activity/property are then used to predict the activity/property/toxicity of any number of structurally related compounds including those that are yet to be synthesized. Computable molecular descriptors are preferred to experimental properties in QSAR analyses because they require molecular structure as the only input and can be inexpensively calculated for a chemical in less than a millisecond. The use of QSAR approach for modeling the efficiencies of chelating collectors was tested and it was learnt that the performances of chelating mineral collectors are amenable to QSAR modeling. The molecular similarity approach used for the selection of structural analogues was used for the selection of N-arylhydroxamic acids. In the case study, 10 N-arylhydroxamic acids were selected from a virtual database of 3800 compounds and thus, a large structural space was explored without spending much resource. The 10 compounds were then synthesized and tested as collectors for sphalerite. Molecular similarity–dissimilarity clustering was found to be an effective scientific tool in the pursuit of finding new mineral collectors.Pharmacological activities, chemical reactivity and physicochemical properties of organic compounds depend on molecular structure. The quantitative-relation that brings out the dependence of a property or activity ( Though the dependence of efficiency of chelating collectors on their molecular structures had been studied ( A large number of TIs can be calculated for a given set of compounds and many topological indices are mutually related. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is one of the ways to eliminate the problem of over-fitting by using correlated descriptors and it also extracts minimum number of orthogonal parameters that explain the maximum variance among the calculated descriptors. Principal components (PC) thus extracted can be used as independent parameters (descriptors) to form the regression equations. Multiple linear regression (MLR) using topological indices, as well as principal components were carried out on three sets of data: A set of 22 cupferron derivatives used to float a uranium ore ( A set of 14 mercaptobenzothiozole tested to float a lead ore ( A set of 9 The three data sets and a set of 17 Octanol–water partition coefficient and soil–water partition coefficient were two of the important physicochemical parameters. Octanol–water partition coefficient (usually expressed as its logarithmic value, log Topological indices or the principal components extracted from them could be used as independent parameters to describe the molecular architecture. In the case of congeneric collectors, (collectors having the same chelating group), introduction of electronic and quantum mechanical parameters did not improve the predictive ability significantly. Computed soil–water partition coefficient, log The regression equation formed had good predictive ability and the differences between predicted and experimental separation efficiencies were less than the experimental errors (±5). Efficiency of a collector depends on the extent to which the collector molecule renders the mineral surface hydrophobic and also on the extent to which it adsorbs on the mineral. Clog An earlier study (  Let us consider that Simple cluster-based selection (SCS). Maximum dissimilarity-based selection (MDS). Dissimilar cluster selection (DCS). In the SCS method, the cluster analysis based on the similarity measures is performed to generate a given number of clusters. One compound can then be chosen from each cluster either randomly or on the basis of the distance from the centroid. In the MDS method, compounds are chosen such that they are maximally different from the compounds already chosen or tested. This can be achieved by ordering the set of compounds in the selection list. In the DCS method, cluster analysis is performed on the dataset to generate A library of 3800  Laboratory flotation tests were carried out in a Denver flotation machine. Two different kinds of ores were used for the flotation tests. Principal component analysis extracted seven principal components (PCs) and they explained 95% of the variance (cumulative variance of PCs is given in One compound from each of the 10 clusters was selected as mentioned before in the section on statistical analysis. The 10 Results of flotation tests on the Pb–Zn ore indicated that out of the 10 compounds tested in the Zn-rougher stage, six of them recovered nearly 80% zinc without activation by copper sulphate. The collectors are arranged in the increasing order of zinc recovery in Recoveries of zinc, copper and pyrite iron (calculated by subtracting iron present in chalcopyrite from total iron) for flotation tests of the Cu–Zn ore are given along with the results for the tests with Pb–Zn ore in One of the important factors to be considered is the reagents used for pyrite suppression. The reagents used in the current study were those commonly used for xanthate collectors. The effectiveness of these reagents for hydroxamate collectors is not well studied. Though hydroxamates have strong affinity for iron they also interact well with zinc. Their strong interaction with zinc in several biological systems forms the basis for using hydroxamates as the key functional group of potential therapeutics targeting at zinc-bound matrix metalloproteinases involved in cancers. Hence, effective suppression of pyrites while using The current study demonstrates the use of molecular similarity to select a small number of compounds for synthesis and testing as mineral collectors from a large database. This offers a scientific tool for the selection of compounds without the trial-and-error method and saves considerable amount of laboratory testing to explore a large structural database. In the current study only 10 compounds were selected, however, to test more compounds, number of clusters should be increased or more compounds could be selected from each cluster-based on the Euclidian distances between the data points (structures) in each cluster. It may be noted that the molecular modeling procedure advocated by Financial support for this research was obtained from Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). Thanks are due to TeckCominco, Trail, British Columbia, Canada, for providing the ore samples and technical consultancy, to Kidd Creek Mines, Timmins, Ontario, for providing the Cu–Zn ore and to Prospec Chemicals, Fort Saskatchewan, Alberta, Canada, for samples of xanthates.