Motivated by recent interventions by the states of New Jersey and Maryland and the introduction of PJM's Minimum Offer Price Rule (MOPR) for capacity markets, we analyze the impact of subsidized government investments in electrical generation on electricity markets. We extend the model of Joskow and Tirole (2007) to address the interconnected nature of the PJM grid by considering a market with two different locations connected by transmission lines. We assume that these lines are constrained during peak periods in a manner similar to Borenstein et al. (2000). We find that government intervention has a significant potential for adverse effects on grid resource adequacy and reliability. In our analysis, subsidized investment in baseload capacity is never optimal. In the short run government provision of base capacity displaces competitive base capacity, which reduces the private provision of peak capacity. In the long run, the threat of intervention imposes costs on suppliers in the form of an expected regulatory taking. As a result, resource adequacy decreases in both markets. If governments respond to this state of affairs by subsidizing further supply additions, expectations of intervention are reinforced and competitive capacity supply further diminishes. MOPR attempts to mitigate this vicious cycle by screening out non-economic bids for new capacity. To the extent market participants view MOPR as a credible policy, it succeeds in this goal. In this case, subsidized capacity additions do not perturb the efficiency of market outcomes as long as any charges to consumers to support the subsidy are lump sum in nature. In this case, subsidized resources simply succeed in capturing rents from taxpayers. Restructured electricity markets have arisen around the world and in numerous states in the US. Restructuring is based upon the conclusion that the generation of electricity is not a natural monopoly and therefore can be opened to market forces. It is also based upon the assumption that political forces will not actively seek to alter market results. The assumption of limited political intervention is currently being tested by the state governments of New Jersey and Maryland in the eastern United States. The governments of these states argue that the wholesale electricity markets in their areas are not operating optimally and are therefore pursuing subsidized investments in base-load generation capacity. New Jersey implemented its Long-term Capacity Agreement Pilot Program (LCAPP) in 2011 to develop 2000 mega-watts (MW) of new electric generation facilities in the state. Maryland similarly ordered construction of from 650 to 700 The actions of New Jersey and Maryland likely have ramifications beyond their borders. New Jersey imported 13.5 terawatt-hours (TWh) out of 79.2 To analyze the impact of subsidized government investment in electrical generation on electricity markets in the short and long runs, we extend the model of We find that subsidized base capacity investments have significant potential for adverse effects on electricity markets. Subsidized investment in baseload capacity is never optimal in our model. In the short run these policies depress prices, with some benefits for both downstream and upstream consumers, but they do so at the expense of misallocating resources and reducing incentives for peak capacity investment in the long run. Intervention creates expectations of regulatory costs, leading suppliers to invest relatively less at every capacity price. If governments respond to this state of affairs by intervening again, a vicious cycle can arise and government's perceived need to intervene may become self-fulfilling. PJM's regulatory response to subsidized capacity investments—the Minimum Offer Price Rule (MOPR) in its capacity markets—attempts to avoid this cycle by screening “non-economic” bids out of the capacity market.  This section begins with a brief introduction to electricity markets, some of their inherent economic problems, and the role of capacity markets in addressing these problems. We then turn to the political debate over capacity markets and describe the recent interventions. Capacity markets exist to address market failures associated with electricity grid resource adequacy. Prior research argues that competitive electricity markets underinvest in resource adequacy for several reasons (cf. At the same time, the presence of price caps in the wholesale energy market further reduces incentives for resource adequacy. Price caps exist to curtail the exercise of market power during peak demand events. Because price caps are arguably set lower than the marginal social value of energy during peak periods, they offer insufficient incentives for precisely the generators that would provide the necessary additional capacity above baseload to meet peak demand. This well-known issue is often termed the “missing money problem” (cf. At least two basic types of policies can address the resource adequacy problem. First, regulators can raise the price cap on wholesale generation prices to the social value of generation at the peak—the “Energy Only” solution. In a capacity market, generators bid to supply forward availability of their capacity in a particular regional transmission organization (RTO). These markets exist in several major US RTOs, including PJM, ISO-NE, and to some extent the Midwest ISO. Despite the underlying economic logic, capacity markets are controversial because some see them as windfalls for generators (e.g. Taxpayers in these states will financially support these investments. In New Jersey particularly, ratepayers will pay fixed, non-bypassable charges to cover the subsidy costs of LCAPP. The use of subsidies implies that either the investments would not be sufficiently profitable (“non-economic”) in their absence or that the contracting firms succeeded in capturing rents. In either case, taxpayers rather than market participants bear the risk for investment performance, which runs counter to one of the main purposes of electricity market restructuring. These subsidized resources planned to bid into the PJM capacity auction at the lowest possible value (e.g. As of this writing, one subsidized plant in Maryland and two out of three projects subsidized under the New Jersey LCAPP program bid into and cleared PJM's May 2012 capacity auction. Two projects in New Jersey received an exception from MOPR from PJM ( The debates over the capacity investments of New Jersey and Maryland raise several related questions: Does it ever make sense for governments to subsidize capacity, and if so how? Are price screens like MOPR sufficient for ensuring the optimal functioning of capacity markets? How will markets react to subsidized capacity investments in the short and longer runs? To provide a more formal framework for analyzing these questions, we extend the competitive electricity market model of  The original J&T model considers a single electricity market where all electricity demanded is supplied from a single location. In today's markets, however, electricity is often exported from one zone to another. The quantity of electricity that flows between zones is limited by the capacity of transmission lines. In turn, these constraints affect electricity prices across zones and may therefore affect policy interventions. We therefore extend the model of J&T to include two locations and a transmission constraint between them (cf. Let From a practical point of view, if constraints always bind, the markets may be treated separately with the analysis of J&T applying in whole to each market. On the other hand, if constraints never bind, the model again collapses to the case considered by J&T. The interesting case to consider is therefore when constraints bind only some fraction of time, which we analyze below. The following proposition characterizes the competitive implementation of the optimal allocation given the existence of price-insensitive retail consumer, referred to as the “Ramsey equilibrium”, in the J&T electricity market model:       In Appendix A, we show that the introduction of a transmission constraint and distinct locations does not change the nature of the problem assuming that private market participant cannot manipulate transmission constraints. [Thus, in addition to these assumptions, we further require that the probability We begin this section by summarizing the relevant remarks on price caps and capacity markets from J&T and summarize their key results. We then formally investigate the model with transmission constraints, focusing on the two-state of nature (off-peak and peak demand) case. Using this framework, we consider optimal capacity market interventions as well as the short and longer run effects of subsidized baseload capacity investments in the downstream market. As J&T note, price caps can be used to curtail market power during peak demand periods, to extract rents from peak suppliers, or to address the presence of a “choke” price in the market, where price-sensitive consumer demand falls to zero. While price caps address several concerns, the presence of a cap creates a “missing money” problem ( The intuition behind this result is that capacity payments provide incentives not only for peak capacity but for baseload capacity as well, because baseload plants are also dispatched during peak events. Consumer prices incorporate capacity payments because these payments effectively provide part of the correct return to the supply of electricity. With more than two states of nature, J&T show that the combination of a price cap and capacity payment cannot induce the Ramsey equilibrium because the number of regulatory targets exceeds the number of instruments. In particular, if the rents available to peakers increase with demand, a single-valued capacity payment cannot create the correct incentive for investment in each state. Taking the simplest case as an illustration, assume two states of nature such that the transmission constraint binds when on peak. Maintaining notation as in J&T, let the frequency of these states be  As a corollary, the result (Eq. As J&T discuss, a price cap of In contrast, for peak capacity suppliers the privately optimal capacity payment is the Cournot capacity price: In the two-state-of-nature case, if governments participate in capacity markets without subsidizing investments and otherwise acting as competitive firms, then the competitive generation and capacity markets may still achieve the Ramsey equilibrium under the same conditions as outlined in Consider the arguments in In particular, capacity subsidies may be viewed as a third policy instrument and therefore may yield an optimal outcome in a three-state-of-nature case. With three states of nature (one off-peak, two distinct levels of “peak” demand where the price cap binds), capacity markets can only restore the Ramsey optimum if price caps are set for each location such that Consider the demand-ordered states of nature To investigate whether government capacity investments can correct the market in either of these cases, consider first the case where the capacity payment On the other hand, assume instead that the capacity price In the general case with more than three states of nature, the number of targets again exceeds the number of instruments and the policy mix cannot restore the Ramsey equilibrium. Nonetheless, this short analysis provides two insights into how government investment in capacity might improve outcomes. First, the model shows that the public goods problem of resource adequacy combined with price caps aimed at limiting market power together imply an insufficient supply of Second, the model shows that even when government provides capacity, social welfare is improved by allowing the market to determine the capacity market price because Assuming governments do make baseload capacity investments in the downstream market, how will these investments affect capacity supplied? To address this question, suppose that government investment adds non-economic baseload capacity downstream such that off-peak supply exceeds the Ramsey off-peak demand. For simplicity, we again assume two states of nature. We investigate off-peak and peak markets separately and consider effects in both downstream and upstream markets. The results for off-peak markets generalize. Let Off-peak, the upstream and downstream markets satisfy the equilibrium conditions: While suppliers necessarily face losses under capacity additions, consumers may see some short-run gains before accounting for resource adequacy concerns. In the downstream market, consumers see some benefit to the increase in quantity supplied since Base capacity investments downstream have effects in the upstream market as well. In equilibrium, off-peak, real-time prices are equal across locations. Therefore, While non-economic investments artificially reduce prices off-peak in the short run, what are their implications for investment in peak capacity? Assume that the transmission line remains constrained during peak periods. Note that applying the off-peak equilibrium condition It is not clear, however, how an addition of base capacity affects market power. Generally, capacity prices lie between the competitive and privately optimal price, which we illustrate with the Cournot capacity price. Thus, consider again the optimization We are interested in the effects of policy on market power in peak capacity, or how the Lerner index changes as Additions of non-economic base capacity in the downstream market affect the upstream capacity market as well. As in the downstream market, the competitive capacity price Non-economic base capacity additions downstream also affect the upstream Cournot capacity price in equilibrium. Similar to downstream suppliers, peakers upstream solve the problem: In comments before the Maryland Public Service Commission, the Independent Market Monitor (IMM) for PJM warned that government investment in electricity markets “will have long lasting, negative consequences for PJM markets,” leading unsubsidized suppliers to exit the market for new capacity (Bowring as quoted in The framework in this paper thus far presumes that suppliers' profits depend on a one-shot realization of capacity price. In actuality, suppliers' profits depend on capacity payments over time. To capture this feature of the problem, suppose that firms face the risk of government intervention in the downstream market after capital is committed. In expectation, the competitive capacity price in each market is: Intuitively, expected capacity prices decrease because the threat of intervention imposes costs on suppliers in the form of an expected regulatory taking. Market participants thus supply less capacity when To preserve resource adequacy, the capacity market requires a mechanism to ensure these kind of regulatory takings do not occur. PJM's Minimum Offer Price Rule attempts to provide such a mechanism by establishing a bid screening price for new resources such that only below-cost (“non-economic”) capacity bids cannot enter the market. For new resources, incremental costs are non-zero because of the significant capital necessary to build the resource. Once built, however, the capital costs of a resource are sunk. The incremental cost of capacity provision at that point is typically zero since the plant can either choose to sit idle or make their capacity available at whatever price clears the market. This observation holds for both subsidized and non-subsidized resources alike. Therefore, to maintain market efficiency it is below-cost bids for new resources that must be mitigated. The Minimum Offer Price Rule (MOPR) is designed to address this issue. If MOPR succeeds in preventing non-economic resources from entering the capacity auction and participants view the policy as credible, it accomplishes this goal because the expectation of the non-economic quantity Given the highly inelastic demand for electricity, the “public good” nature of grid resource adequacy, and the “missing money” problem induced by wholesale electricity price caps, electricity generators underinvest in capacity in the absence of corrective policy. Capacity markets address these problems by giving generators incentives to provide resource adequacy. Against this backdrop, New Jersey and Maryland recently committed to subsidize new baseload capacity in their states. Ratepayers in these states have also been committed to pay for these subsidies. We investigate the impact of these market interventions, extending the framework of A non-economic addition of baseload capacity in the downstream market necessarily affects the incentives for peak capacity provision in both locations in our model. Competitive capacity prices decrease in both the downstream and upstream markets. Cournot prices for peak capacity also fall if demand is quasi-concave. This change in prices reflects the fact that less peak capacity is needed in these markets due to the addition of subsidized base capacity, which supplies the market during both off-peak and peak periods. In the longer run, the threat of subsidized baseload capacity reduces incentives for capacity investments, even when the government does not intervene. In effect, the expectation of regulatory costs exacerbates the missing money problem. As suppliers' expectations of government action become reinforced, the expected return to capacity investments decreases. This state of affairs creates a problem for long run grid resource adequacy and runs counter to the stated intent of the governments of New Jersey and Maryland. Policies like PJM's MOPR may mitigate this situation if they correctly and credibly screen out non-economic capacity additions. Even if such policies do preserve market efficiency and resource adequacy, however, subsidies for capacity investments nonetheless constitute an unnecessary transfer from taxpayers to contracted firms and run counter to the purpose of electricity market restructuring. Our analysis therefore shows that in the context of restructured electricity markets, subsidized additions of base capacity by state governments are, at best, a costly and undue burden for taxpayers. At worst, these subsidies have the perverse effect of reducing the incentives for resource adequacy in the long run. In this case, our analysis suggests that to “keep the lights on,” states either need to let markets work or face the prospect of continued, costly interventions over the long run. We thank our EMI sponsors and affiliates, Seth Blumsack, Rob Williams, and numerous conference participants at the 31st USAEE/IAEE North American Conference.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at