Although bone metastasis to the acetabulum can cause significant disability from pain and immobility, little has been written about the diagnosis and management of a pathologic acetabular fracture. We present three patients with metastatic acetabular fractures and discuss an approach to evaluation and management. When a high index of suspicion of fracture exists, further radiographic workup is warranted. Management requires a multidisciplinary approach. Factors such as age, associated comorbidities, natural history of the underlying primary cancer, general health status, prognosis, acetabular fracture characteristics, and quality of bone should be considered. We briefly discuss the options available to nonoperative candidates.Metastatic deposits to the acetabulum cause significant pain and functional disability, especially when the weight-bearing aspect of the acetabulum is involved. Patients with metastatic acetabular fractures can present with vague, diffuse groin pain or hip pain. The evaluation and management of these patients is a challenging problem. In this paper, we present three patients with metastatic acetabular fractures and discuss a decision-making approach. An 84-year-old man with a history of hormone-refractory prostate cancer presented with hip pain and difficulty moving his hips for six weeks. When initially diagnosed with hormone-refractory, Gleason 9 (4 The anteroposterior (AP) and frog leg views of both hips showed no evidence of fracture. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the hips using 1.5 A 55-year-old man with recurrent esophageal cancer presented with progressive left hip pain for six months. When first diagnosed two years earlier, he underwent neoadjuvant chemoradiation followed by esophagectomy with gastric pull-up. Recurrence of the cancer was first thought be localized and was treated with esophageal dilatation and Wilson Cook stent placement. The shooting pain in his left leg began insidiously, especially during hip flexion and rotation. An AP radiograph of the left hip at that time showed no fractures and a radioisotope bone scan only showed evidence of rib metastasis. Subsequently, the left hip pain worsened and was exacerbated by weight bearing, as well as by flexion and external/internal rotation of the hip. A repeat AP radiograph of the left hip showed joint degeneration, proximal femoral endosteal scalloping, and osteopenia. The patient insisted on leaving the hospital before any further evaluation could be performed. One week later, he returned with new-onset rectal pain of a few days' duration and “dripping stool.” The perirectal pain was sharp and shooting, and he described it “like someone is rubbing sand into the skin.” The pain was exacerbated by movement of the left hip. He had poor sphincter tone with guaiac positive brown stool. There was no back pain or saddle anesthesia, and leg strength and reflexes were intact. His rectal pain improved with hydromorphone 2 Autopsy examination showed widespread metastatic adenocarcinoma of the heart, lungs, temporal lobe, skull, ribs, left hip, adrenal glands, and kidneys. Dissection of the left acetabulum showed nondisplaced fractures, necrotic soft tissue and bone. Histopathologic examination showed metastatic adenocarcinoma. The remainder of the pelvis was normal and the bowel was unremarkable except for multiple diverticuli in the left descending colon and sigmoid colon, and foci of mucosal hemorrhage and congestion in the rectum. No abnormalities were noted in the spinal cord, but metastases were present in the left temporal lobe, leptomeninges, and dura mater. A 72-year-old man with colon cancer presented with right hip pain. Four years earlier, he had a left hemicolectomy for adenocarcinoma of the colon. His medical comorbidities included sick sinus syndrome, atrial fibrillation, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, stroke, and chronic renal insufficiency. The new right hip pain had been progressive for a month, but he was able to bear weight. The pain intensity was rated as 8/10. On physical examination, he was able to ambulate without assistance, but there was pain on internal rotation of the hip joint. An AP radiograph of the right hip was equivocal for the presence of bone lesions. Radioisotope bone scan showed increased uptake in the right acetabulum extending to the right ischium. CT scan showed a 2.0 Acetabular fractures typically present as groin pain exacerbated by weight bearing. Pain in the medial thigh and knee can indicate acetabular disease or femoral head destruction. Passive range of motion at the hip joint usually is painless unless there is involvement of the proximal femur. If there is an inability to actively flex or abduct the hip in the supine position, then severe intertrochanteric disease should also be considered. The complex three-dimensional structure of the acetabulum makes radiographic diagnosis of fractures difficult. Plain radiography remains the first step in the imaging workup. An AP view is necessary and Judet oblique views are recommended to evaluate the anterior and posterior columns of the acetabulum. When an occult fracture is noted on CT scan, the diagnostic differential includes acetabular insufficiency fractures and metastasis, which present similarly and occur in the same patient population. The first patient had a typical presentation of hip pain exacerbated by weight bearing. Plain films failed to demonstrate the bilateral acetabular fractures seen on CT scan. The second patient also experienced significant hip pain limiting weight bearing. Again, plain radiographs were normal, but metastatic acetabular fracture was confirmed on autopsy. These cases emphasize the importance of considering metastatic acetabular fractures as an etiology of hip pain even in the presence of normal radiographs. In a study of supracetabular fractures, plain radiographs were normal in 67% of cases and showed a sclerotic band indicative of pathology in only 25% of cases. The second patient presented with significant rectal pain with no findings on autopsy to explain his pain. The shooting nature appeared more consistent with a neuropathic process and its acute onset seemed inconsistent with diabetic neuropathy. We propose that his acetabular fracture caused referred rectal pain. Kim and Azuma have shown that the acetabular labrum is rich in nerve endings suggesting a role in nociception and propioception. When acetabular fracture is confirmed, the general indications for surgery include life expectancy greater than one month, ability to medically tolerate surgery, sufficient intact bone, and an expected benefit from the operation permitting mobilization and general improved quality of life. Other factors in the decision to operate on metastatic acetabular lesions include continued debilitating pain and immobility despite restricted weight bearing, systemic antineoplastic therapy, and analgesic therapy; continued symptoms for 1–3 months after localized radiation therapy; or pathologic fracture of the acetabulum or ipsilateral femur, or an impending ipsilateral femoral fracture. Three general surgical options are popular depending on the defects: 1) reconstruction of the acetabular defect using pins or screws and cement with a cemented acetabular component, 2) resection of the diseased bone with a hemipelvis prosthesis used for reconstruction, and 3) resection of the pubic rami and acetabulum and reconstruction using a saddle prosthesis that articulates between proximal femur and remaining ileum. Two large series have been reported on surgery for metastatic acetabular disease. In one, 58 patients who received hip arthroplasty for metastatic acetabular fractures and fracture-dislocations were divided into five operative treatment groups dependent on the extent and involvement of disease. In another series, 55 patients underwent surgical reconstruction for metastatic acetabular disease. Fifty-four patients received a combination of screws or pins and cement with a cemented protrusion acetabular component combined with total hip replacement. One patient received a hemipelvis endoprosthesis with total hip replacement. Thirty-four patients had significant pain relief at three months. Postoperatively, nine of 18 non-ambulatory patients regained their ability to walk, and 14 of 17 ambulatory patients preserved their ambulation. Five patients had prosthetic loosening due to recurrent disease. There was one perioperative mortality and median survival was nine months. For those patients who do not require surgery, or are not operative candidates, palliative therapy should be provided as follows: Analgesia: A combination of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug and an opioid can improve pain control in patients with cancer pain. Supportive weight bearing: The use of crutches, a cane or a wheelchair may reduce the risk of fracture and relieve pain by decreasing force on the weight-bearing bones. Systemic therapy: Treating the underlying disease with chemotherapy and hormonal therapy may provide pain relief. Radiation therapy: The Expert Panel for the Radiation Oncology Bone Metastasis Working Group suggested 20 Injections: Methylmethacrylate and ethanol injections into the osteolytic lesion are palliative procedures with the aim of providing fast pain relief. Methylmethacrylate or acrylic bone cement provides significant pain relief in as little as 4 hours after injection. Bone metastasis to the acetabulum can cause pain and disability. A high index of suspicion is needed and a radiologic workup beyond plain hip films may be warranted so that such occult fractures are not missed. Surgery is appropriate in carefully selected cases. If surgery is not appropriate, a comprehensive approach to palliation should be considered. Radiofrequency ablation can provide pain relief in patients with lytic bone lesions, including pelvic lesions, and may be suitable for carefully selected patients with acetabular metastases.