This paper presents selectivity curves based on experimental data obtained for four different groups of hydrocyclones. The results show that the effect of pressure on the shape of the selectivity curve is significantly smaller than that of the feed concentration and the ratio between vortex finder and apex size.
                  The role of particle–particle interactions as a responsible mechanism for the fish-hook effect will be discussed. These interactions manifest themselves through the interstitial fluid, by secondary current and pressure field changes in the carrying fluid, caused by the presence of other particles. As a result, fines are dragged by the wakes generated behind larger particles.Hydrocyclones are widely used in the minerals industry for solid/solid or solid/liquid separation in a liquid phase continuum. The flow field within a hydrocyclone has a nonstationary and three-dimensional character that can be illustrated by the recent results obtained by A selectivity function describing the performance of a hydrocyclone is shown in A classical classifier has one inlet and one outlet, and its performance is described by a classification function obtained from theoretical analysis. The shape of the classification function is shown in To reduce the number of measurements needed for obtaining the selectivity curve, The selectivity function determined from the mass balance equations To calculate the classification function, In the classical approach, the    The equations describing the separation function (see  The latest experimental data of Therefore, interactions similar to those predicted by The ratio between the centrifugal acceleration, The experimental data were obtained at the pilot and operation plants of the Dow Chemical Company. The performance of three different hydrocyclones (2- and 4-in. Krebs Engineers and 2-in. Richard Mozley) and three slurries (lime in water, glass beads in water and test dust in water) were investigated. A laser diffraction technique was applied for measuring particle size distribution in all three streams. A full description of the experimental procedure is presented elsewhere Examples of the measured particle size distributions, for different types of slurries, are shown in  In Hydrocyclone performance is characterised by the selectivity curve calculated from The fish-hook effect starts to occur at particle sizes of 3.409, 2.976, 3.409 and 2.599 μm in lime/water, glass bead/water and test dust/water system (I) and (II), respectively. The effects of various parameters on the shape of the selectivity curve are shown in Two mechanisms, solids classification and solids bypassing to an underflow stream, define the shape of the selectivity curve. Here, the role of particle–particle interaction on these two mechanisms is discussed according to two conceptual models of hydrocyclone operation shown in In this approach, it is assumed that a fraction of the feed solids is short-circuited with liquid to the underflow stream The change of weight in the fluid element moving to the overflow stream in an infinitesimal time interval is given by the product of the weight of particles present, the probability of transferring and the time interval. Integrating over the mean residence time, Substitution for For particle in the range of For particle in the range of Since  Here, it is assumed that the bypass mechanism is influenced by particle–particle interactions. The selectivity curve is composed from a well-accepted classification curve, Integrating over the mean residence time, At the smallest size of particle A comparison of the experimental results and the adjusted selectivity function (Approach B) is shown in  The shape of the separation curve was measured for four different types of slurries in 2- and 4-in. hydrocyclones. The results for particles below 1 μm were disregarded according to the sensitivity of a laser diffraction instrument. The fish-hook phenomenon was observed in all systems. It started at the particle size of 3.409, 2.976, 3.409 and 2.599 μm in lime/water, glass beads/water and test dust water system (I) and (II), respectively. The effect of pressure on the fish-hook curve was found to be less significant than the effects of feed concentration and the ratio between the vortex finder and apex size. The experimental results also showed that the assumption frequently made about the bypass being equal to the fluid recovery is not generally applicable, which is in agreement with the work of The attempt to explain the fish-hook phenomenon by taking into consideration particle–particle interactions and modifying either the classification (Approach A) or bypass (Approach B) functions is presented. There is no any experimental evidence to assess which of these particular approaches is more realistic from the physical point. Our feeling is that the concept of the two separation mechanisms is useful to explain the complexity of multi-phase flow dynamics. However, it can only be applied as a preliminary tool in describing the performance of a hydrocyclone.