The objective of the paper is to assess the impacts of some of the important changes occurred in the Brazilian economy in the 90s on income distribution. A Pure Leontief Model and a Leontief-Miazawa Model were utilized to portray the structure of the economy in both years, and to perform counterfactual simulations on some important changes occurring during the period. The methodology allowed for the identification of the high- and low-inequality sectors in both years, and to assess their contribution to the increasing inequality during the period. It is interesting to notice that some sectors with low internal inequality ended-up provoking increased global inequality through their interaction pattern with other sectors in the economy, and through the consumption structure. The results also indicate that the change in sectoral shares in the period contributed to diminishing inequality. Therefore, the causes for increasing inequality remain within the distribution of wages within the sectors.Brazil is one of the most unequal countries in the world in terms of income distribution. This situation is quite stable and remains almost unchanged for decades ( According to Radar Social Brasileiro, The 1990s were a period of intense economic changes in Brazil. Until 1990, the Brazilian economy was quite closed, with most of final, as well as intermediate, consumption being supplied by Brazilian companies. Even exports were a small part of final demand. In a few years time, the economy was opened up at a fast pace, generating opportunities and creating problems at a very rapid rate. As a whole, the decade was marked by low product growth, many stabilization plans, changes of currency, etc. The weak economy was highly vulnerable to external crises, such as those of Mexico in 1995, Southeast Asia in 1997, and Russia in 1998. On top of that, the Argentinean crisis and energy supply problems resulted in a low growth, stop-and-go economy, with an overall poor economic performance. In order to be able to design efficient policies, a better diagnosis of income inequality and its causes is in order. Although growth was not impressive in the period, important structural changes took place. The objective of this paper is to assess the impacts of some of the important changes that occurred within the Brazilian economy in the 1990s on the distribution of income. This will be done by examining the productive structures existing in 1992 and 2002. A series of simulations will be performed in order to establish the impacts of such changes on the distribution of income. It follows the steps of The paper is organized in five sections. Section In the open input–output model, the vector of final demands is treated as completely exogenous to the system (Leontief model). However, for the model to be closer to reality, as suggested by The intersectoral flows existing in a given economy, which are determined by both technological and economic factors, can be described by a system of simultaneous equations represented by: The vector of final demands, however, is the sum of a vector of consumption demands and a vector of exogenous demands (i.e., government expenditure, investment, and exports): The multisectoral consumption function is defined as: The income distribution structure can be represented by the simultaneous equations To calculate the solution for the static model we start by substituting Moreover, it is convenient to express the matrix in Finally, substituting The Gini index is employed to measure inequality. Since we only have data by category, the methodology presented by The population mean is The share of the We thus have: Since we do not know the values within each stratum, it is impossible to calculate Two I–O matrices were used in this study: the one produced for IBGE for 1992, and one estimated for 2002 according to the methodology developed by Based on PNAD 1992 and 2001, we considered the sum of monthly income to all persons living in the household, except for retirement payments and domestic servants. For each of the 31 sectors we have the total payment of wages, which were allocated to 10 income classes. Inflation between 1992 and 2002 was considered through the IPCA, from IBGE, so that we work with constant Reais. The household expenditure survey POF was implemented in 2002 and 2003. Its information includes monetary and non-monetary income, as well as monetary and non-monetary consumption. A total of 48,470 households were interviewed, and for each the sources of income were identified, as well as the expenditure pattern. Households were split into 10 income classes. Expenditure by households was allocated to 10,429 types in POF 2002. These were aggregated to form 80 types in this study. We have thus expenditure on 80 different products or services by each income class.  We start by presenting inequality measures for 1992 and 2002 (   In order to assess the impacts of different factors in shaping the observed pattern of income inequality in 2002, some simulations were produced. For that, a positive shock of R$ 1 million was introduced to each sector at a time. Each shock spreads into the economic structure through the technical coefficients (indirect effects) and through the consumption patterns (induced effects), changing the payments of wages to different income classes, and, therefore, income inequality. Since each sector has a different repercussion pattern to other sectors, these different shocks lead to different inequality patterns. If the resulting pattern produces inequality higher than the average, the conclusion is that that sector contributes to augmenting inequality. If not, it contributes to diminishing inequality. The results presented before relate to the within-sector inequality; the ones presented now indicate the national inequality produced by the shock in the sector. The first could be considered as the direct impact on inequality, and the later as the direct plus indirect plus induced effects. The first simulation considers what inequality would be if the sector shares remained the same as in 1992. As analyzed in  The above situation portrayed a case in which each sector maintained the pattern of wage distribution to the 10 income classes, but the importance of the sectors have changed. In this simulation we keep the shares constant, and simulate changes in the distribution pattern of wages to different income classes.  The simulations intend to highlight some of the important changes occurred during the period. As the numbers in Results are presented in If the number in column A for a specific sector is smaller than 0.5145, which is the national Gini for 2002, the shock contributes to improve income distribution; if it is higher, it will produce further income concentration. Results for 2002 alone are displayed in This study deals with the impacts of structural changes on income distribution in Brazil in the period 1992–2002. A Pure Leontief model and a Leontief–Miazawa model were utilized to portray the structure of the economy in both years, and to perform counterfactual simulations on some important changes occurring during the period. The methodology allowed for the identification of the high- and low-inequality sectors in both years, and to their contribution to the increasing inequality during the period. It is interesting to notice that some sectors with low internal inequality ended up provoking increased global inequality through their interaction pattern with other sectors in the economy, and through the consumption structure. The results also indicate that the change in sectoral shares in the period contributed to diminishing inequality. Therefore, the causes for increasing inequality remain with the distribution of wages within the sectors.