With the current focus on sustainability, it is necessary to evaluate cement’s environmental impact properly, especially when developing new ‘green’ concrete types. Therefore, this chapter investigates the available literature on every process concerned during the production of cement. Inventory data on energy use, CO2, PM10, SOx and NOx emissions are collected. Alternatives and improvement are briefly described regarding energy performance and mineralogy changes that it induces for clinker. In this chapter the process of cement production will be described regarding its contribution in terms of energy consumption and associated environmental impacts. The chapter will then focus on the differences that exist between the different cement production plants. It will be highlighted that these differences are due to technology differences but also to internal variability in the supply chain. To conclude, the main perspective in term of reduction of cement production’s environmental impacts will be discussed.  Naturally occurring calcareous deposits such as limestone, marl or chalk provide calcium carbonate (CaCO An open mining process inducing the use of drilling, blasting and heavy earth moving equipment is common for quarrying operations.  The cement industry utilizes four types of mills: ball mill, vertical roller mill, roller press (high-pressure grinding roll, HPGR) and horizontal roller press mill. Different mill feeds, such as raw material, coal, clinker and slag, have different grindabilities, feed particle size ranges and moisture content as well as different throughput rates, fineness data and other quality parameters. Each mill type associated with the grinding process is more suitable for some applications and requirements over others. Raw material grinding has the objective of producing a homogeneous raw meal with a fineness requirement (less than 10–15% residue on the 90 (mm sieve) from a raw material containing moisture (3–8%) with a feed particle size of 100–200 To reduce the natural chemical variation in the various raw materials, it is necessary to blend and homogenize the raw material efficiently. This is done through continuous blending silos. A preheater is a series of vertical cyclones through which the raw meal is passed, coming into contact with swirling hot kiln exhaust gases moving in the opposite direction. In these cyclones, thermal energy is recovered from the hot flue gases, and the raw meal is preheated before it enters the kiln. Depending on the raw material moisture content, a kiln may have up to six stages of cyclones with increasing heat recovery with each extra stage. After the preheater, modern plants have a precalciner, where limestone is decomposed to lime and carbon dioxide. Here, the chemical decomposition of limestone typically emits 60–65% of total emissions. Fuel combustion generates the rest, 65% of which occur in the precalciner.  Different types of kilns are briefly explained below but more details can be found for instance in Semi-wet rotary kilns are used when the wet raw material is processed in a filter after homogenizing to reduce moisture content. It is an improved version of the wet process. This is mainly used for retrofitting the existing wet kilns. This process can reduce energy consumption by 0.3 GJ/tonne of clinker. In semi-dry rotary kiln, waste heat recovered from the kiln is used to remove moisture content. Then the dried meal is fed into the kiln. As the existing long dry kilns without preheaters still consume more energy than new technologies, they are often improved by the addition of a preheater. Dry kilns with preheaters include kilns with 4–6 multistage cyclone preheaters. The raw materials are passed through the cyclones. As one part of the calcinations already takes place in the preheater, it is possible to reduce the energy consumption due to reduction in the length of the kiln. With dry kilns with preheater and pre-calciner, an additional combustion chamber is installed between the preheater and the kiln. This pre-calciner chamber consumes about 60% of the fuel used in the kiln, and 80–90% of the calcinations take place here. This reduces energy consumption by 8–11%. Low-temperature waste heat from the combustion chamber can also be recovered for other purposes. Finally, a number of shaft kilns can be found in China and India. In India their share is 10%, while in China it is over 80% of the capacities. Their usual size is between 20 and 200 tonnes/day, and many of them are operated manually. Clinker quality is highly dependent on the homogenization of pellets and fuel, and on the air supply. Inadequate air supply or uneven air distribution makes combustion incomplete, resulting in low-quality clinker and high CO and volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions. We show the kiln’s energy consumption from  This is the final step in a cement manufacturing process. In this step, the clinker is ground together with additives in a cement mill. All cement types contain around 4–5% gypsum to control the setting time of the product. Traditionally, ball mills have been used for grinding, although more efficient technologies of roller presses and vertical mills are used in many modern plants today. As for raw material, four types of grinding systems are used: ball mill, vertical roller mill, high-pressure roller press and horizontal roller press mill. The ball mills are still used in clinker grinding even though its application has decreased in new plant projects. A vertical roller mill uses approximately 40% less power than a traditional ball mill. Vertical mills with an integral separator are used for finish grinding with a mill capacity of 350 tonne per hour. An high-pressure roller press (HPRP) is used in various systems with ball mills for primary grinding and semi-finish grinding or as a single-stage grinding process for finish grinding. Horizontal roller press mills are suitable for use as a single-stage grinding process. Energy savings are 50% compared to ball mills and 20% compared to vertical mills, but the throughput rates are limited at 120 tonne per hour (  Many environmental studies have detailed the impacts of the different processes involved in the cement manufacturing ( Over the last decades, the emphasis has clearly shifted towards a global focus on climate change. A recent study has gathered the global impacts of cement production.  Regional environmental impacts include SO The majority of SO The generation of NOx and CO is mainly as outputs from fuel usage during clinker production. Their emissions are highly dependent on temperature and oxygen availability and rotary kilns produce much more NOx and less CO because of their higher operation temperature and stable ventilation compared to shaft kilns ( Cement kiln dust (CKD) emissions are the main contributors to the local impact. The size of CKD (0.05 to 5  The use of alternative fuels and raw materials (AFR) for cement and clinker production is certainly of high importance for the cement manufacturer but also for society as a whole. Alternative fuel utilization began in the mid- 1980s. Starting in calciner lines, up to almost 100% alternative fuel firing at the pre-calciner stage was very quickly achieved. Alternative fuels are mainly used tires, animal residues, sewage sludges, waste oil and lumpy materials. The last are solid recovered fuels retrieved from industry waste streams, and to a growing extent also from municipal sources. These refuse-derived fuels are pre-treated light fractions processed by mechanical or air separation. Waste-derived fuels consist of shredded paper, plastics, foils, textiles and rubber and also contain metal or mineral impurities.  When alternative fuels are used in the cement kiln, these alternative fuels are mixed with the raw meal and can have an influence on the clinker properties. A recent paper made a review of the chemical consequences of the minor elements added to the clinker by the use of alternative fuel (  Sulfur (S The increase in Na The maximum amount of Cu, Ni, Sn, and Zn that could be incorporated in a laboratory clinker has been determined experimentally. This threshold limit is found to be 0.35% of Cu, 0.5% of Ni, 1% of Sn and 0.7% for Zn ( A recent study has evaluated the perspective of alternative fuel used and has shown that in developed countries a ratio of 40–60% of alternative fuel in 2050 can be achieved while in the developing countries this ratio will be around 25–35% (  Waste management legislation significantly impacts availability: higher fuel substitution only takes place if local or regional waste legislation restricts land-filling or dedicated incineration, and allows controlled waste collection and treatment of alternative fuels. Local waste collection networks must be adequate. Alternative fuel costs are likely to increase with high CO The level of social acceptance of co-processing waste fuels in cement plants can strongly affect local uptake. People are often concerned about harmful emissions from co-processing, even though emissions levels from well-managed cement plants are lower with alternative fuel use ( Another option to reduce the environmental impact of cement production is to reduce the amount of clinker in the cement. This option allows a cost reduction in the cement manufacturing process by saving burning costs and is a highly efficient CO  Condition (b) the substance or object is produced as an integral part of a production process; Condition (c) the substance or object can be used directly without any further processing other than normal industrial practice; Condition (d) further use is lawful, i.e. the substance or object fulfils all relevant product, environmental and health protection requirements for the specific use and will not lead to overall adverse environmental or human health impacts. This Directive is very relevant to the use of SCMs such as blast furnace slags and fly ash. Therefore in Europe these two materials can no longer be considered as waste but instead as by-products. Hence, the question is what is the environmental cost of these by-products? Different scenarios can be promoted. Dividing the impact by the relative mass value of the different products (steel/slags) induces too high an environmental load for by-products and a division in relation to the relative economic value of the products seems more in accordance with the perception of what could be the environmental load of these SCMs. The main problem with the economic allocation is the question of price variability as illustrated in Among alternative cementitious materials, it should also be pointed out that rather than partly substituting the clinker, it is also possible to develop new binders. Energy demand in clinker production has been significantly reduced over the last few decades. The theoretical minimum primary energy consumption (heat) for the chemical and mineralogical reactions is approximately 1.6–1.85 GJ/t ( A significant decrease in specific power consumption will only be achieved through major retrofits. These have high investment costs and so retrofits are currently limited. Strengthened environmental requirements can increase power consumption (e.g., dust emissions limits require more power for dust separation regardless of the technology applied). The demand for high cement performance, which requires very fine grinding and uses significantly more power than low-performing cement. As a consequence the best available techniques (  The use of pure oxygen instead of air can in theory result in a very significant improvement in thermal efficiency, because it reduces the volume of the exhaust gases (and their associated heat losses) by a factor of about 3. It also leads to exhaust gases that are essentially a simple mixture of CO  Cement production evolution is linked with economic activity and the levels of industrialization and infrastructure development of the country. These parameters can be expressed as an intensity of cement use that refers to the amount of cement used per unit of gross domestic product (GDP) (kg/unit of GDP). Note that a unit of GDP is here adjusted to 1000 constant dollars (base year: 2000) and expressed in term of purchasing power parities (PPP) which are the rates of currency conversion that eliminate the differences in price levels between countries. Cement intensities differ between countries according to economic growth (GDP) and economic structure. Different studies attended to demonstrate that this intensity follows an inverted U-shape curve ( In Western Europe Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries, the intensity of cement use is currently estimated at 21 With assumptions on GDP evolution and on cement demand intensity, it is then possible to evaluate the cement production evolution. A model described as VLEEM 2 (Very Long Term Energy Model) has been used to make assumption on future cement production ( 