A novel and simple method based on acid extraction was developed for the determination of Ca, Na, K, P, Mg, Cu, Mn and Zn in chocolate bars by inductively coupled plasma techniques, ICP OES and ICP-MS. The parameters time, temperature and nitric acid concentration were studied in multivariate form using a certified chocolate material. In the optimized conditions 20mL of 1.4molL−1 HNO3, a temperature of 100°C and 6 min of extraction were selected. Certified chocolate reference material was analyzed and the results were in agreement with certified concentrations (recoveries between 98% and 107%). In addition, the results obtained by analyzing six different chocolate samples with different cocoa contents (ranging between 28% and 85%) by the proposed method were compared with those obtained by microwave-assisted acid digestion. Recoveries were in the range of 90–110%. The proposed acid extraction was successfully applied to sixteen chocolate samples and the results indicated that concentrations of K, Mg, P, Cu, Mn and Zn increase with the cocoa content and an opposite effect was observed for Na and Ca. The proposed method is a good alternative to conventional acid digestion procedure and can be applied to routine analysis of major and minor constituents in chocolate bars.Chocolate is a food product largely consumed due to its flavor, texture and eating pleasure. Its main components come from fermented, crushed, and roasted cocoa beans, the seeds of the tropical Primarily, chocolates can be classified as white, milk and dark, depending mainly on the amounts of cocoa mass, cocoa butter and milk added in manufacturing process. Within these types, dark chocolate has the largest amount of cocoa mass and the smallest amount of added fats. On the other hand, milk and white chocolates contain higher amounts of milk and cocoa butter than dark chocolates; their components are similar to each other but white chocolate has no cocoa mass in its composition Although there are relatively high levels of sugar and fat, several publications have suggested that consumption of chocolates and other cocoa derivatives may have positive health implications, contributing to reduction of cancer risk, cardiovascular disease, hypertension, arterial disease and diabetes, and some of these benefits are attributed to the antioxidant activity of the high levels of flavonoids and polyphenols Taking into account that children are large consumers of chocolate, the development of efficient analytical methods for controlling major and minor inorganic constituents is an important task and, at the same time, an analytical challenge due to the complexity of the matrix (large amounts of organic matter, including macromolecules and a lipid content ranging between 28% and 31%) The literature reports procedures for chocolate sample treatment involving principally dry ashing, wet and microwave-assisted acid digestion prior the use of atomic absorption spectrometry or inductively coupled plasma based techniques Ieggli et al. proposed emulsification-based methods for the determination of Na, K, Ca, Mn, Zn and Fe by flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) On the other hand, a preconcentration procedure using cloud point extraction for the determination of Cu and Zn in powdered chocolate by FAAS was proposed by Ferreira et al. Based on these difficulties and considering that inductively coupled plasma techniques (ICP OES and ICP-MS) have become the choice for rapid multielemental determinations, a novel and simple analytical method based on rapid acid extraction was developed and optimized using a multivariate procedure. This was then applied for the determination of Ca, Na, K, P and Mg by ICP OES and Cu, Zn and Mn by ICP-MS in chocolate bars. The measurements of the major elements (Na, K, Mg, Ca and P) were carried out using an inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP OES) model Optima 8300 DV (Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT), equipped with a peristaltic pump, a concentric nebulizer and a quartz demountable plasma torch. The equipment was operated in radial configuration for Na and K, and in axial configuration for P, Mg, and Ca. The operational parameters used for the analytical measurements were: radio frequency power of 1300 The minor element determinations (Cu, Zn and Mn) were carried out using an inductively coupled plasma quadrupole mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) instrument, model 7700x (Agilent, Hachioji, Japan), equipped with octopole reaction system (ORS Analytical-grade reagents and deionized water (Milli-Q system, 18.2 A certified reference material of baking chocolate (NIST 2384) from the National Institute of Standards and Technology — NIST (Gaithersburg, MD) was used to verify the accuracy of the proposed method. Sixteen chocolate samples from different brands and types (labeled by the manufacturers as white, milk and dark chocolate), and six chocolate samples from the same brand with different cocoa contents (ranging between 28% and 85%) were analyzed in this study. They were purchased in the local markets in Campinas, State of São Paulo, Brazil in the January–March 2014 period. A 2 In the optimized conditions, certified reference material and chocolate bars were scratched (using a ceramic knife) and scraps were accurately weighed (300 Sample treatment was performed using a microwave digestion system (ETHOS1, Milestone, Sorisole, Italy) equipped with closed polytetrafluoroethylene vessels and sensors for temperature and pressure control. Chocolate samples (300 The method was validated by determining various figures of merit, such as accuracy, precision, limits of detection and quantification. The accuracy of the method was evaluated using the chocolate certified material (NIST 2384). In addition, the results of the proposal method were compared with those obtained by microwave-assisted acid digestion. A 2 For multielemental analysis a compromise condition is normally selected, thus the significance of the factors studied was evaluated using the overall response, as can be observed in the Pareto chart ( The effects were also evaluated for each element (employing recovery as response), and temperature showed a significant effect for almost all elements, except for Cu and Zn. For these elements a quantitative extraction (recoveries ranged between 89% and 105%) was observed. The nitric acid concentration showed a significant effect on Na, P and Mg extraction, and quantitative extractions for these elements were observed when the highest concentration of nitric acid and the highest temperature was employed. These results can be explained considering that chocolates are a suspension of fine particles in a fat phase and melt at lower temperatures, typically 34–35 The time of extraction was not statistically significant on the overall response in the range studied (3–9 The certified reference materials (CRMs) play a critical role in validating the accuracy of an analytical method. A number of available food CRMs of different matrix composition have been used to evaluate the accuracy during the development of methods. However, care must be taken in choosing certified reference material because it must mimic the real sample, mainly in relation to carbohydrate, protein and fat content. In this regard, the literature reports a limited number of studies that demonstrate the appropriate choice of CRM in chocolate analysis Concentrations for all elements analyzed were in agreement with certified values when microwave-assisted acid digestion (recoveries ranged from 100% to 106%) and the proposed acid extraction (recoveries ranged from 98% to 107%) were employed as sample treatment prior to analysis by ICP OES and ICP-MS. The limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ) were calculated as 3 In general, the limits of detection and quantification obtained by the proposed method and by microwave-assisted acid digestion are similar to each other. The limits of quantification obtained for Mn, Cu and Zn, by ICP-MS, could permit determination of these elements in samples with relatively low concentrations as, for example, in white chocolates, according to Ieggli et al. The precision of the acid extraction method was evaluated in terms of repeatability, obtained by analyzing the certified reference material six times within a short period of time and the RSD (%) values obtained were: 5.4 (Na), 3.5 (Ca), 3.6 (K), 2.3 (P), 3.2 (Mg), 1.8 (Cu), 2.5 (Mn), and 3.1 (Zn). Chocolate bars with six different cocoa contents (between 28% and 85%) were analyzed, and the results obtained by using the proposed acid extraction method and the microwave-assisted acid digestion method were compared to verify the applicability for analysis of chocolate samples with different compositions. The results obtained are shown in The results showed that for almost all elements analyzed (except to P and Zn) there was no significant difference between concentrations obtained by the proposed method and the microwave-assisted acid extraction for sample treatment (paired Student's Although microwave-assisted acid digestion can be considered a rapid and effective sample treatment when compared with classical digestion procedures (wet and dry ashing) The characteristics of some alternative methods described in the literature for chocolate sample treatment, developed and applied to determine various elements in chocolate bars are described in The proposed acid extraction is faster than any sample treatment reported in the literature for determination of minerals in chocolate bars, uses a fixed sample mass for the determination of all elements (emulsion techniques reported the sample mass varying according to the element to be analyzed) and the samples have no particles in suspension (because of the filtration step), facilitating the nebulization step and avoiding the possibility of clogging the inlet of the ICP. In addition, the possible interferences arising from the matrix are minimized due to release of analytes from a solid (large amount of organic matter) to a liquid phase prior to the analysis by ICP OES and ICP-MS. The proposed method was applied for the determination of major (Na, Ca, K, Mg and P by ICP OES) and minor (Cu, Zn and Mn by ICP-MS) elements in sixteen samples of chocolate bars from different types and brands. The results are shown in The concentrations found for all elements are in agreement with those described in the literature The study of acid extraction in multivariate form allowed the optimization of this method using a minimum number of experiments. The procedure showed to be a faster and simpler alternative to conventional acid digestion methods for multielemental determinations and can be used in routine analysis due to high analytical frequency and low reagent consumption that means lower cost and less residue generated. The proposed method was successfully applied to determine Na, Ca, K, Mg, P, Cu, Mn and Zn in chocolate bars, opening the possibility for the determination of other major and minor elements present in this food product. The authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. Carol Collins for English assistence, the