Fractures and dislocations involving the shoulder girdle are common. If these injuries occur after high-energy trauma, initial assessment must follow Advanced Trauma Life Support™ (ATLS)™ guidelines to identify associated life-threatening injuries. Physical examination must include a thorough neurovascular assessment of the upper limb, with particular attention to the axillary nerve and brachial plexus because they are often damaged in injuries to the shoulder girdle. Knowledge of the relevant anatomy and accurate radiological evaluation help classify the severity of the fracture or dislocation. Classification of the injury helps guide treatment and indicate prognosis. Most fractures and dislocations of the shoulder girdle are managed with a brief period of immobilization followed by early, progressive mobilization of the entire upper limb to prevent stiffness. Surgical treatment is appropriate in some patients and various techniques are used to achieve reduction of the fracture or dislocation and maintain reduction by internal fixation. Complications may occur as a result of initial injury or after treatment of the fracture or dislocation.The shoulder girdle comprises three bones (clavicle, proximal humerus, scapula) and three joints (glenohumeral, acromioclavicular, sternoclavicular). Injuries of the shoulder girdle are common.  Most fractures involve the proximal humerus and clavicle; scapular fractures represent <5% of fractures of the shoulder girdle. Most dislocations involve the glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints; sternoclavicular dislocations represent <5% of dislocations of the shoulder girdle. Shoulder girdle injuries may follow high-energy trauma (e.g. road traffic accidents) and initial assessment follows Advanced Trauma Life Support™ (ATLS™) guidelines to identify associated life- threatening injuries, particularly to the cervical spine, chest wall, lung and mediastinum (see    severity of soft tissue injury neurovascular status of the upper limb associated injury.    humeral head greater tuberosity lesser tuberosity proximal humeral shaft.    physiological status and comorbidity fracture morphology surgeon’s experience of shoulder reconstruction.  restoration of a stable shoulder fulcrum (by open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture, or by hemiarthroplasty) early mobilization of joint under physiotherapy supervision to prevent stiffness.     subclavian artery and vein posterior to the medial third brachial plexus posterior to the middle third supraclavicular nerves crossing subcutaneously over the clavicle.   type-I fractures involve the medial one-fifth type-II fractures (80% of all clavicle fractures) involve the middle three-fifths type-III fractures involve the lateral one-fifth of the clavicle. The classification system further divides these three main types into subgroups based on:  displacement angulation comminution intra-articular involvement.   open fractures ‘floating shoulder’ injuries (fractures proximal and distal to the glenoid) clavicle fractures with the potential for skin breakdown from underlying sharp bony fragments symptomatic non-unions.  Scapula fractures represent 0.3% of all fractures, and occur after high-energy trauma (e.g. fall from a height, road traffic accident). Initial assessment is crucial and should follow ATLS™ guidelines to identify associated life-threatening injuries, including:  rib fractures haemopneumothorax pulmonary contusion fracture of the cervical spine skull fracture injuries to the neck, pelvis, abdomen and distal extremities. Glenohumeral dislocations account for 85% of dislocations around the shoulder girdle (see      Sternoclavicular dislocation accounts for <5% of all dislocations around the shoulder girdle. It is caused by an indirect force on the sternoclavicular joint from lateral compression of the shoulder. Most injuries are anterior dislocations and are treated conservatively. Posterior dislocation of the sternoclavicular joint, though rare, is a serious injury due to the pressure from the displaced medial end of the clavicle on the trachea, oesophagus and major vessels. These patients may present with:  airway compromise dysphagia venous congestion of the head and neck.