Background
                  Terrible triad of the elbow can be a challenging injury to treat, with a history of well-known complications. The purpose of this study is to report the outcomes of a modification of the standard surgical protocol for the repair of terrible triad of the elbow injuries.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed terrible triad of the elbow injuries treated at our hospital using a modified surgical technique. Our surgical procedure includes fixation or replacement of the radial head and repair of the ruptured lateral collateral ligament (LCL) through a lateral approach. Simultaneous fixation of the coronoid process and repair of the common flexor muscle and medial collateral ligament (MCL) injury were performed through an anteromedial incision. Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS) was determined for each patient at the final clinic visit. The Broberg and Morrey classification was used for evaluating traumatic arthritis.
               
                  Results
                  There were 21 patients (21 elbows) included in the analysis, and the mean follow-up period was 32 months (range, 24–48 months). At the last follow-up the mean flexion–extension arc of the elbow was 126° and the mean forearm rotation was 139°. The mean MEPS was 95 points (range, 85–100 points), with 19 excellent results and two good results. Concentric stability was restored in all cases. Two patients had heterotopic ossification, one patient had radial head nonunion, one patient had a superficial infection, and one patient had ulnar nerve neuropathy.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our surgical strategy for terrible triad of the elbow has the advantage of providing both bony and soft-tissue stability simultaneously, thereby allowing active early motion as well as functional recovery of the elbow.Elbow dislocation with associated radial head and coronoid process fractures has been referred to as the terrible triad of the elbow by Hotchkiss However, there are still differences of opinion among surgeons as to the best surgical procedure, the choice of fixation technique, and the need for medial collateral ligament (MCL) repair; factors that influence the overall management of these complex injuries. Twenty-three consecutive cases of elbow dislocation associated with fractures of the radial head and coronoid process were identified as terrible triad of the elbow injuries at the Shanghai 6th People's Hospital between July 2008 and January 2011. Two patients were lost to follow-up prior to definitive assessment of the outcome, leaving 21 patients (21 elbows) for evaluation. There were 17 males and 4 females with a mean age of 38.4 years (range, 17–63 years). The mechanisms of injury were fall from a height (15 cases), sports injury (4 cases), and traffic accident (2 cases). The 21 elbows were treated surgically at a mean of 4 days (range, 2–8 days) after the injury. Computed tomography (CT) was routinely used in cases of terrible triad injuries before surgery to identify fracture patterns, comminution, and displacement which may not be evident on plain radiographs. Three-dimensional CT was applied in difficult cases to improve the understanding of the injury. O’Driscoll et al. Soft-tissue injuries in all patients were evaluated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and injuries were categorised into three types. Type I soft-tissue injuries were lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex injuries without MCL injury; there was rupture or avulsion of the LCL from the lateral epicondyle, as well as the common extensor tendon and posterior capsule ( All procedures were performed by or under the direct supervision of one fellowship-trained orthopaedic surgeon. An extended lateral approach in combination with a separate medial approach was used in every patient. The radial head fracture was addressed first through a lateral approach (Kocher approach), with a preference for fixation over replacement even in Mason type III radial head fractures. Then, the LCL complex was temporarily sutured to the supra-lateral condyle to provide provisional stability of elbow joint to restore articulation of the humeroulnar joint to facilitate reduction and fixation of coronoid fracture. Next, an anteromedial skin incision was made ( Once bony reconstruction was complete, the LCL complex injury, in which detachment of the lateral ligament complex from the humerus was common, was repaired using suture anchors. Mid-substance tears were repaired with direct suture using number 1 or 2 non-absorbable suture. Elbow stability was then evaluated with the goal being concentric stability with no observed posterior or posterolateral subluxation through a flexion–extension arc of 20–130° with the forearm in neutral rotation. If posterior or posterolateral instability persisted, fixation of the radial head and coronoid process were checked and augmented suturing of the lateral ligament complex was performed if needed. Elbow valgus stability was then tested, and exploration of the medial side was performed if instability was found or in cases in which there were preoperative MRI findings of MCL body rupture or avulsion. For patients with type III soft-tissue injury, and those with type II soft-tissue injury who had serious valgus instability (5 patients), the MCL was repaired through an anteromedial skin incision and suture anchors were usually used to repair the avulsion of the MCL from the medial humeral epicondyle ( A hinged plastic brace was applied after surgery and used for 6 weeks postoperatively in all patients. For patients with type I soft-tissue injuries, the elbow was immobilised at 90° of flexion using the brace with the forearm in full pronation to avoid posterolateral instability and to protect the LCL repair when they were not performing rehabilitation exercises. For patients with type II or type III soft-tissue injuries, the arm was fixed with the brace at neutral rotation at 90° of flexion when they were not performing rehabilitation exercises. Supervised rehabilitation was begun on the second day after surgery for all patients. Active elbow flexion and extension and passive forearm rotation exercises with the protection of the brace lasting for 20 Indomethacin, 25 Patients were followed up clinically and radiographically until fracture union and until the plateau stage of elbow motion range was reached. Function and stability of the elbow joint and pain were assessed and results recorded. Radiography was used for identification of synostosis, heterotopic ossification, and joint congruency. The Broberg and Morrey classification Functional outcomes are shown in Based on the Broberg and Morrey classification for the radiographic assessment of posttraumatic arthritis, 13 elbows had no evidence of degenerative changes (grade 0), and 8 elbows had grade 1 changes. There were no grade 2 or 3 changes. All coronoid and radial head fractures treated with internal fixation had solid osseous union on the final follow-up radiographs, except for one patient with a Mason type III radial head fracture who developed radial head nonunion. The patient, however, was asymptomatic with no limitation of forearm rotation. All of the patients maintained a concentric reduction of both the ulnotrochlear and the radiocapitellar articulation, without any evidence of elbow instability. There were six patients with type I soft tissue injuries, 12 with type 2, and three with type 3 soft tissue injuries. Slight heterotopic ossification was evident in two patients, but neither required additional surgery. Several patients experienced transient postoperative median nerve paralysis (1–4 weeks after surgery), with rapid recovery and no after-effects. One patient experienced ulnar nerve symptoms; however, as of the last follow-up visit he declined further explorative surgery. A superficial wound infection occurred in one patient, which healed uneventfully after surgical debridement and antibiotic therapy. The two cases of heterotopic ossification, one case of infection, and one case of ulnar neuropathy occurred in patients with type II soft tissue injuries, and the radial head non-union occurred in a patient with type I soft tissue injury. Other complications such as synostosis, implantation failure, or elbow stiffness or instability were absent. The purpose of this study was to report the outcomes of a modification of the standard surgical protocol for the repair of terrible triad of the elbow injuries. The results of 21 cases showed that the modified surgical protocol results in good outcomes with minimal surgical and postoperative morbidity. Major findings of the study include: (1) The combination of a lateral approach and the anteromedial approach instead of the posterior approach is an effective method for the treatment of terrible triad of the elbow injuries. (2) The procedures of the surgery are different from those used in the traditional approach. (3) MRI can be used for classification of soft tissue injury, and for planning the surgical treatment. With the improvement of operative strategies for terrible triad of the elbow injuries excellent results of treatment have been reported. The surgical protocol for terrible triad of the elbow injuries is well established as follows. We seldom use the posterior approach for terrible triad of the elbow injuries, which is recommended in most articles for access to both the medial and lateral aspects of the elbow, Our limited experience with radial head prosthesis replacement suggests that it is a technically difficult procedure for the treatment of terrible triad of the elbow injuries. First, the height of the radial head should correspond to the height of the excised fragments; however, in cases of radial neck comminuted fractures undersizing of the removed head fragments is common, which can result in elbow valgus instability if accompanied by MCL injury. On the other hand, oversizing of the removed head fragments may cause increasing the height of the radial head and overstuffing of the humeroradial joint, with the potential risk of stiffness and capitellar erosion. Despite its small size, the coronoid process is an important capital bony stabiliser of the humeroulnar articulation. Posterior dislocation of the ulna relative to the distal humerus can be adequately reduced by stable fixation of the coronoid, achieving congruent articulation. Once restoration of the bony structure is complete, the soft-tissue injury should be repaired. The LCL complex can be reattached to the lateral epicondyle with suture anchors or transosseous sutures definitely. The reason why we do an initial temporary fixation of the LCL complex is that the humeral–ulnar joint is usually dislocated or unstable before reduction and fixation of coronoid fracture, whereas after fixation of the coronoid fracture the elbow is more stable and anatomically correct at which time it is more appropriate to perform the definitive repair of LCL complex using the anchor suture technique. This method assists in adjusting the tension of LCL complex to avoid laxity or over-tension. Then, stability of the elbow is evaluated using the hanging arm test and the valgus stress test. At this point, if there is remaining posterolateral instability from approximately 30° to full flexion in one or more positions of forearm rotation or on intra-operative radiographs, we examine the repair of bony and soft tissue and if there is apparent valgus instability the MCL is explored and repaired. Besides exposure of the coronoid process, an anteromedial incision has the additional advantage of exposing the MCL anteromedially. Damage to the MCL and the common flexor–pronator muscle complex can be easily identified and repaired through this incision. In contrast, in the most favorable posterior incision MCL exposure is posteromedial, and frequently requires exposure of the ulnar nerve and can result in ulnar neuropathy. Although it is well known that the MCL functions as a restraint to elbow valgus laxity and posteromedial rotator instability, Differences of opinion remain on whether to repair the MCL in terrible triad of the elbow injuries. Forthman et al. Although good results can be achieved using a hinged external fixator in cases of complex elbow instability, We begin active rehabilitation exercises on the second day postoperatively with the routine use of a hinged plastic brace. With direct repair of the LCL complex, the MCL, and the bony structure, the elbow is stable enough for immediate active-assisted motion, and the muscle strength of the elbow flexor and extensor reinforces elbow stability through dynamic stabilisation. A recent biomechanical study There are limitations of this study that should be considered. First, the number of patients was relatively small. The operations were all performed by or under the direct supervision of one surgeon and at a single institution, thus the results may not be reproducible by other surgeons or at other institutions. On the other hand, the results showed that the technique provides good results with minimal morbidity. In conclusion, the results of this study indicate that the modified surgical technique we have described results in good to excellent outcomes for the treatment of terrible triad of the elbow injuries with minimal complications or morbidity. Future comparative studies should be performed to further elucidate the optimal protocol for treating these injuries. Level IV. None of the authors have any conflicts of interest with regards to this research