We analysed outcomes of new operative techniques for open reduction and internal fixation in 120 consecutive patients with fractures of the pelvic ring and 164 patients with acetabular fractures treated between 1989 and 1999. An anterior extraperitoneal approach was performed through a low midline incision to fix the anterior and lateral parts of the pelvis and for central involvement of different types of acetabular fractures. The anterior approach was combined with a lateral incision on the lateral crest for fractures of the iliac wing and with a posterior approach for sacroiliac injuries, or with Kocher–Langenbeck approach for posterior acetabular involvements.
                  The complication rate of the new techniques was low. Heterotopic ossification was rare. The functional recovery was good in 66 of the 81 patients with an unstable C-type pelvic injury, in 18 out of the 20 patients with a lateral compression, B-2-type injury and 13 out of 19 patients with a open book, B-1-injury. Neurological recovery was observed after adequate reduction in those patients suffering from lesions of the sacral plexus. The radiographic result was good in 73, 20 and 17 of the patients groups, respectively. The Harris Hip Score was more than 80 in 75% of the 164 patients with an acetabular fracture. The radiological result was good (residual displacement 0–2mm) in 84%, fair (3–5mm) in 9% and poor (more than 5mm) in 7%. The new methods are less invasive than the basic approaches described in the literature. The whole pelvic ring, as well as all the acetabular fracture combinations may be treated with the combination of approaches used in the present study.Open reduction and internal fixation of displaced acetabular fractures were widely accepted first during the 1980s, nearly two decades after Judet and Letournel had published their classification and first encouraging results of the new treatment protocol. Internal fixation of the posterior ring was largely adopted initially in the late 1980s. Open reduction and stabilization of the most unstable C-type fractures have been more widely accepted in recent years, the treatment of partially stable open book fractures, as well as lateral compression type fractures, seems to be controversial in most centres. Conservative bed rest and/or external fixation are still accepted as primary choices in many units. The aim of modern treatment of orthopaedic trauma is to achieve an anatomical reduction, a short hospital stay and early rehabilitation. In addition, all patients expect good functional recovery following ideal treatment and appropriate rehabilitation periods. A displacement of 2 Our policy for 17 years has been to restore the anatomy operatively in both displaced acetabular and pelvic injuries. The internal fixation techniques and outcome results of the first patient groups are presented. We evaluated consecutively 135 patients with an unstable pelvic ring injury treated between 1989 and 1999 and 197 patients with acetabular fractures between 1993 and 1999, all treated with open reduction and internal fixation. Follow-up was accomplished in 120 of the pelvic group (three excluded because of major spine injury, six had died, six were lost to follow-up). In the acetabular group, 33 patients were lost to follow-up (nineteen had died during the follow-up, 14 were lost to follow-up) leaving 164 patients for the final analysis. The mean follow-up time in the pelvic group was 1.8 (1–8) years and in the acetabular group 3.9 (1.2–9.1) years. Pelvic ring fractures (120 patients). According to the AO classification there were 19 open book (12 type B1 and 7 type B3-1), 20 lateral compression (12 type B2-1, 8 type B2-2) and 81 vertically unstable (21 type C1-1, 13 type C1-2, 29 type C 1–3, 10 type C-2 and 8 type C3) injuries. There were eight open fractures and five had a Morel-Lavalle soft tissue injury. A concomitant acetabular fracture was seen in 15 cases. Lumbosacral injury was seen in 43 patients, of these 4 (in 21%) were in the open book injury group, 6 (30%) in the lateral compression injury group and 33 in the totally unstable, type C group (41%). The mean age of the patients was 33 (13–84) years, male predominance by 86 versus 34 women. All the patients were operated on within 21 days; the timing depending on the general condition, estimated bleeding risk and associated injuries of each individual patient. The mean ISS score was 29 (10–59). Indications for operative treatment were in C-type injuries: unstable injury of the posterior part of the pelvis (fracture of the sacrum or posterior part of the wing, dislocation of the SI joint) with or without symphyseal disruption, displaced anterior part of the ring or a concomitant acetabular fracture. In B2-type fractures, indication for operative treatment was displacement of the anterior fragments of more than 10 Acetabular fractures (164 patients). According to the classification of Judet and Letournel there were 59 elementary fractures: 27 posterior wall, 4 posterior column, 8 anterior column and 20 transverse fractures. In the associated fracture group (105 patients) there were 14 T-type, 3 posterior column with quadrilateral involvement, 14 anterior wall and posterior hemitransverse and 74 both column fractures. Central luxation of the femoral head was present in 41 cases, posterior luxation in 36. Eighteen patients had an associated femoral head injury (Pipkin fracture). Ischial nerve or lumbosacral plexus injury was observed preoperatively clinically in 26 patients, an obturator nerve dysfunction in 4 and a superior gluteal nerve lesion in 1 patient. The mean age of the patients at the time of injury was 43 (15–90) years. As in the pelvic group the majority were men, 126 male and 38 female. The injuries were caused by motor vehicle accidents (45%), car-pedestrian accidents (8%), falling from height (26%), low-energy falls (16%), other reason (5%). The patients were operated on 5 (0–26) days after the accident. Polytrauma with other major injuries was recorded in 39 (24%) patients and was the main reason for a delayed operative treatment. Indications for operative treatment were any fracture with a clear instability of the weight bearing area of the acetabulum, displaced fracture more than 2 The vertical displacement of the anterior and posterior ring was measured from the AP radiographs of the pelvis. The AP displacement of the posterior part of the pelvic ring was determined by CT. The classification of acetabular fractures was based on plain and oblique radiographs and especially on CT scans. Reformation pictures were used as an additional information source only if the classification or preoperative planning could not be accomplished otherwise. Radiographs were taken and analysed preoperatively, postoperatively and at the final follow-up. Radiological result in the pelvic group was graded by the maximal residual displacement in the posterior or anterior injury to the pelvic ring as: excellent 0–5 The posterior fixation was accomplished with the patient in prone position as described by Matta and Saucedo. During the initial years of this study, a Pfannenstiel approach was used to expose the symphysis, the extraperitoneal, prevesical intrapelvic space and the medial part of the rami (Stoppa approach). However, it was soon recognized that a vertical suprapubic incision gave a more advanced extraperitoneal access to the anterior ring as well as to the lateral, acetabular quadrilateral bottom area, under the important neurovascular bundle and psoas muscle. Moreover, the need to detach any part of the rectus muscles became unnecessary. The fractures involving the iliac wing were exposed through a separate lateral incision. This dual incision technique was named as an ilioanterior approach. In all the cases, no preparation of the major neurovascular bundles was necessary as seen in the original ilioinguinal approach. The lower midline incision gave an access to the entire pelvic brim from symphysis to the ischial foramen. The pelvic brim was exposed laterally, depending on the extension of the fracture, by staying in the close vicinity on the bone, under the rectus muscle, inguinal and funicular structures. The iliopectineal fascia was detached, as well as the entire periosteal insertions to the brim, whenever needed. After this, the iliac neurovascular bundle with the psoas could be elevated more anteriorly to enhance the view on the anterior and lateral part of the brim. Any larger anastomotic vessels between the iliac arteries or veins (corona mortis vessels) lying on the pubic brim were ligated, smaller ones were electrocoagulated. Fixation of the reduced fragments was accomplished mainly with 3.5 In acetabular fractures three possible approaches or their combinations were used: anterior extraperitoneal approach (as described above), lateral approach on the iliac wing (lateral window of the ilioinguinal approach) and posterior (Kocher–Langenbeck) approach. An ilioinguinal approach was used in the beginning of the series in three cases. Modified ilioinguinal, extended iliofemoral, triradiate, transtrcohanteric or iliofemoral approaches were never used. A standard Kocher–Langenbeck approach was routinely used for the fractures of the posterior wall and posterior column, and in association with the anterior approach in T-type, transverse and both column fractures, whenever considered necessary. In acetabular fractures a standard anterior approach was chosen through the lower midline incision as described before. Lateral fixation of the anterior column from the SI joint to the supratectal area was completed through the lateral approach (i.e. upper part of the lateral window of the ilioinguinal approach) ( All patients were mobilised immediately after the operation whenever the general condition of the patient did not prevent it. The patients were encouraged to walk with crutches and weight bearing was allowed after 4–12 weeks depending on the type of the injury in both patient groups. The joint was always mobilised immediately, whenever the pain was sufficiently reduced with analgesics. Walking exercises were controlled and guided by physiotherapists. In pelvic fractures the functional outcome was measured using a scoring system described by Majeed In all the 39 B-type injuries an anterior plate fixation was used. The mean operative time was 112 (50–280) min and the mean blood loss 760 (100–2900) ml. In 67 out of the 81 (83%) patients with type C injuries both posterior and anterior fixation was performed. The anterior fixation was internal in 63 cases, whereas in 4 cases an external fixation frame was selected. In 11 type C patients the posterior fixation was considered sufficient without any anterior stabilization, two of these showed no anterior injury site and nine of them showed a minimal anterior displacement of the ring. Anterior fixation only was selected in three type C patients because of a minimal displacement of the posterior elements. The mean operative time in the C-type group was 94 (20–325) The overall radiological results were excellent or good in 110 (92% patients) and fair or poor in 10 (8%). There loss of reduction was seen in symphyseal fixation in two patients in the B1 group, the other after repeated laparotomies and the other suffering from deep wound infection. In the C-type fractures, there were four patients with poor reduction result (two in the posterior and two in the anterior part of the ring). In addition, in two cases, a secondary displacement occurred in the symphyseal area which was initially left without any fixation. Similarly, two out of three patients with a primarily unfixed non-displaced sacral fracture had a displacement of more than 10 The functional result was excellent or good in 13, fair in 4 and poor in 2 in patients with an open book type B 1 injury. There were 4 patients having primarily a lumbosacral plexus injury. All the patients showed some recovery but the overall result remained fair because of persistent pain symptoms. There was one deep infection and the final result remained poor. The other poor result was seen in a patient with initial massive bleeding, reoperations, loss of fixation and removal of the plate. In the type B 2 group, the final functional result was excellent or good in 18 out of 20 patients. Two had some pain in the anterior part of the ring at the final check-up. There were six patients in the B2 group with an initial lumbosacral lesion recorded preoperatively, especially sensory deficiencies corresponding to the L5 and SI roots. All the patients had a complete neurologic recovery at the final follow-up. Patients suffering from the type C fracture showed excellent or good recovery in 66 (81%) cases. Five patients had an unsatisfactory functional result despite having a good radiologic result and without any signs of neural injuries. Four of them had moderate pain in the posterior part of the ring and one had a traumatic thigh amputation. All the others with a poor result had either a poor reduction result or signs of lumbosacral plexus injury with neural deficiencies. Four of those eight patients with an unsatisfactory reduction result had a fair or poor functional end-result. All the 33 patients with a lumbosacral plexus injury showed at least some evidence of neural recovery. Nine patients had complete recovery, six had some sensory deficits, two of them with a fair functional result. In 18 patients, a partial functional muscular defect was present at the final check-up, 6 of them having an unsatisfactory functional end-result. In nine patients, the residual muscular weakness was minimal and eight of them showed an excellent or good functional result. Complications after operatively treated pelvic fractures were loss or insufficiency of the reduction in 10 cases, deep wound infection in five cases, all in complicated cases. There were two posterior infections, one in a patient with an open fracture and the other with a degloving (Morel-Lavalle) injury, and in three anterior infections, two in association with open fracture and one with massive bleeding and reoperations. There were four superficial infections, two in the anterior and two in the posterior sites. An iatrogenic lesion of the L5 root was observed in one patient after incorrect positioning of the sacroiliac srew. One vascular lesion of the external iliac vein arose from a tapping instrument and was treated immediately with sutures without further consequences. Lateral cutaneous nerve lesions were seen in two cases, and signs of heterotopic ossification in seven patients ( The reduction was successful in 138 (84%) cases. A remaining displacement of 3–5 At the final follow-up there were 20 cases with signs of osteonecrosis of the femoral head and 14 patients with secondary osteoarthritis. Total arthroplasty was the end-result in 23 cases during the follow-up period. Heterotopic ossification was recorded in five patients, four of them being mild and without any clinical symptoms. Functional result was determined in 141 patients. Those patients with total hip arthroplasty were excluded. The Harris Hip Score was more than 80 points in 106 (75%) patients, 60–79 in 22 (16%) and less than 60 in 13 (9%) patients ( Complications after acetabular fracture care were failure of fixation in six and an intraarticular screw malposition in four patients. There were five deep vein thromboses documented with sonography or venography and one pulmonary embolism diagnosed with CT. Two superficial wound infections but no deep wound infections were recorded. However, there were two patients with postoperative sepsis, one of these developed a bowel perforation and peritonitis. One 90-year-old male resulted in multiple organ failure (MOF) and died. No other deaths during the rehabilitation period were observed. Iatrogenic lesion of the lateral cutaneous nerve resulted in 20 cases leaving permanent discomfort in one female patient ( The treatment of both the pelvic and acetabular fractures is demanding. The operative techniques developed during the last 40 years, have been mainly for the acetabular surgery. However, development is still continuing and optimal treatment protocols are still under scientific evaluation and critical discussion, especially in the treatment of pelvic fractures. Fixation of the anterior part of the ring is still considered unnecessary in many centres although all biomechanical tests show inferior stability of a partially stabilised ring compared to a more extensive fixation of the whole ring. External fixation devices cannot restore enough stability in the unstable type C injuries to allow mobilization of the patient without risk of redisplacement of the injury sites leading to suboptimal functional results. The widely used ilioinguinal approach and especially the extended iliofemoral, transtrochanteric and triradiate exposures can be considered extensive and traumatic. The preparation of the neurovascular bundle with lymphatic vessels and funicular structures contains risks, needs extra time for meticulous preparation and always causes scar tissue formation around these important areas when using the ilioinguinal technique. All techniques directed to the joint through lateral or posterior approaches create scar formation, contain a risk of heterotopic ossification and have to be noted as a potential risk for any possible endoprosthetic solution later on. At the Department of Orthopaedics and Traumatology in Helsinki University Hospital the policy of internal fixation of both the acetabular and pelvic fractures was adopted simultaneously in 1989. The anterior approach was further developed during future years as a route to achieve access to both on the entire pelvic brim and in the acetabular quadrilateral area. First experiences were encouraging. The anterior extraperitoneal approach used in the present study gives a wide view on the true pelvis and can be used in both the pelvic and acetabular fracture treatment. As an anatomical, quite short midline incision between the rectus muscles, it can be considered less invasive when compared to many other approaches on the pelvic area. The approach was combined with lateral and/or posterior approaches in pelvic fractures and with lateral and/or Kocher–Langenbeck approaches in acetabular fractures depending of the fracture type in each patient. In acetabular fractures the anterior technique gives access and a direct view on the quadrilateral area, anterior wall area and even more, on the important supratectal area. Especially in those cases where the acetabular roof hides an articular fragment impacted to the weight bearing dome area, this medial window can allow the reduction of the fragments, transportation of cancellous bone and bone substitution materials and fixation of the fractures without lateral extrapelvic exposures and dislocating the joint. The anterior approach leaves the extrapelvic juxtaacetabular tissues intact which is important in possible secondary osteoarthritis and eventual joint replacement surgery, seen more likely in the elderly patients with osteoporotic bone and comminuted fractures. As seen in the limited number of complications this approach can be considered relatively safe, although the operation is demanding and needs good surgical skills and good knowledge of intrapelvic anatomy. The low incidence of major surgical complications, as well as deep venous thrombosis and heterotopic ossification was an important finding in both patient groups. Although the risk of major vascular injuries is always present, there was only one lesion of the iliac vein. Interestingly, there were no clinical or radiologically verified deep venous thrombosis in the pelvic group and the incidence was low in the acetabular group. Although all the patients received antithrombotic prophylaxis during the hospital stay this was an important finding, because the intrapelvic technique always includes some manipulation of the iliac vessels together with other anterior vascular structures. Moreover, there were neither femoral nerve injuries nor any lesions of the obturator nerve, although the nerve always has to be pushed down with a blunt retractor, when the lateral bony structures have to be revealed. The neurological recovery in the pelvic group with plexus injuries needs to be noted. Good recovery in both muscular and sensory deficiencies was observed especially in those patients where the reduction and fixation were successful and were in accordance with earlier studies. The radiological and functional results of the acetabular group can also be considered favourable. Three quarters of the patients showed good functional recovery. It is important to recognize, that there were actually no exclusion criteria for operative treatment in the relatively large series of patients. Even the oldest patients, patients with severe acetabular comminution and osteoporosis were operated on. Recognizing this fact the incidence of posttraumatic osteoarthritis and number of arthroplasties were relatively low. Because of the variability of age and general condition of the patients with acetabular fractures the Harris Hip Score was chosen to describe the functional recovery of the affected joint. Although being somewhat inaccurate it is widely used as a standard functional score. It succeeded to give a sufficient comprehension of the relatively good functional end-results obtained in the heterogenic group of the present study. The good reduction together with proper stabilization allow early mobilization, prevent complications and thereby lead to a short hospital stay and to an early start of rehabilitation. The encouraging results with good functional recovery, the possibility of anatomical reduction with the less invasive techniques described above and the relatively low complication rate give a strong indication to continue the policy and efforts to reduce and fix both the pelvic ring and acetabular fractures in an anatomical position, whenever the general condition of the patient allows major reconstructive procedures.