The prevailing N saturation paradigm still considers microbial N immobilization as a less important process of ecosystem N retention. On the contrary, we hypothesize that it can even be a primary process affecting N leaching from N saturated soils. We studied N transformations in soils of acidified near-natural and primeval forests in the Bohemian Forest (watersheds of Plešné and Čertovo Lakes, Czech Republic) and Pop Ivan Massif (Ukraine). Organic soils were sampled from similar conditions (1100–1500 m a.s.l., precipitation 1400–1800 mm, acidic bedrock, forest dominated by Picea abies) and had similar chemical properties (pHKCl 2.5–3.2, BS ∼45%, Alex ∼40 meq kg−1). However, the Ukrainian soil had lower soil C/N ratio (24 vs. 30) and C availability (water soluble C and C/N ratio of 65 vs. ∼114–163 μmol g−1 and 6 vs. 21–24, respectively) than the other soils. We ran laboratory experiments in which mixtures of different N sources (N–NH4, N–NO3 and glycine) were added to the soil with only one source 15N-labelled. We followed 15N partitioning within soil N pools and analysed the composition of the microbial community (16SrDNA-DGGE fingerprint of bacteria, ergosterol analyses, qPCR of fungal 18S rDNA gene). The microbial N pool was always three to five times higher than the total soluble N pool. We found rapid (15 min) and simultaneous immobilization of all added N forms into the microbial biomass with clear preferences for organic N over inorganic sources. The total N flux to the microbial pool always exceeded N flux into mineral N pools. The pattern of N transformation in the C limited soil was different from the other soils. The microbial pool and N flux into it were smaller compared to the mineral N pools and fluxes. The contribution of N–NO3 to microbial immobilization was negligible, while nitrification was almost equal to N mineralization. Total N flux through soluble N pools was greater than total N flux to insoluble pools (residual and microbial N); this was accompanied by lower microbial N uptake efficiency and shorter residence time of N in microbial pool than in soils with higher C availability. The composition of bacterial community was related to DOC content and C and N in microbial biomass. In soils with higher fungal abundance, more glycine was immobilized regardless of soil C availability, but with higher deamination (∼50 vs. 20%) and subsequent release of N–NH4 back to the soil. Our study emphasized the role of microbial N immobilization in preventing N–NO3 loss from N saturated ecosystems as a function of C availability. Nitrification was favoured when enough N–NH4 was available in the C limited soil. The discharged N–NO3 was not immobilized by the microbes and could be, if not immobilized by plants, leached out. C limitation plays an important role in the susceptibility of ecosystems to N leaching and could partially explain the observed differences in some N-saturated ecosystems.The acidification of European mountain ecosystems as a consequence of elevated deposition of sulphur (S) and nitrogen (N) compounds during the industrial period has gone hand in hand with their N saturation ( The assumption that N mineralization and nitrification can contribute significantly to N flux on an annual scale, while microbial N immobilization cannot, is not substantiated. It is widely accepted that N mineralization and nitrification are some of the most variable soil processes fluctuating within a daily time scale. Similarly, microbes grow and die also on a daily/monthly time scale. However, the turnover time of the total microbial biomass pool in the soil can be from days to a year ( The microbial N pool is far larger than the soil mineral N pool, suggesting that microbial N immobilization is the most important biochemical N flux throughout the soil profile ( The long term N input was though to reduce the microbial biomass pool ( Conducting meta-analysis, Microorganisms have the potential to use organic and inorganic N sources ( The aim of this study was to estimate the role of N mineralization, nitrification and microbial N immobilization with a special focus on the immobilization of organic and inorganic N in acidified and N-saturated soils of mountain spruce forests. Our starting hypotheses were that (1) N immobilization by microbial biomass affects N leaching from N saturated soils; (2) microorganisms immobilize organic and inorganic N quickly and at the same time and do not prefer N–NH Soil samples were taken from the mountain watersheds of Plešné (PL, 48°77′N, 13°86′E) and Čertovo (CT, 49°16′, 13°20′E) lakes located in Bohemian Forest (South Bohemia), and from the Pop Ivan Massif (UA, 47°57′N, 24°31′E) in the Carpathian biosphere reserve located on the border between Ukraine and Romania ( The Plešné and Čertovo lake watersheds are situated at elevations from 1030 to 1378 m a.s.l. with north-east and east expositions, respectively. The study was conducted at two research sites (one in each watershed) situated at elevations of 1122 m and 1057 m a.s.l. for PL and CT, respectively. The bedrock of PL is composed of granite, while in the CT watershed it is predominantly mica-schist (muscovite gneiss). The soils in both watersheds are leptosol, podzol and dystric cambisol. The soils are shallow (33 vs. 65 cm) and are on average covered with ∼90–160 year old Norwegian Spruce ( The Ukrainian natural forest site is situated at 1480 m a.s.l. on a steep slope oriented to the west. The bedrock is crystalline schist and gneiss. The predominant soils are dystric cambisol and entic podzols ( The soil samples were collected in May in three consecutive years (to avoid the impact of seasonal fluctuations): 2008–2010 at the PL and CT sites and 2009–2011 at the UA site. We took the organic soil (Ol + Of) samples from 8 random locations at each site. Four composite samples were prepared for basic soil analyses by mixing the aliquot parts of the soil of two locations at each site. Sieved (5 mm) soil samples were transported under 4 °C and were either immediately (up to 2 days) analysed for basic soil characteristics (see Soil pH was determined in both deionized water and 1M KCl (exchangeable pH). Exchangeable base cations (BC = sum of Ca Briefly, the soil samples (10 g, 60% of water holding capacity) were placed in glass flasks sealed with perforated Parafilm and incubated for one and three weeks (10 °C). After one week incubation, the soil was extracted (0.5 M K A manipulative experiment was run on two independent replicates with the PL and CT soils from the samplings in 2008 and 2010 and with the UA soil from samplings in 2009 and 2011. Moist soil samples (10 g, 60% WHC) were placed in 100 ml glass flasks and pre-incubated at 10 °C for one day. Then, soil was supplied with a solution containing a mixture of ammonium (NH  The fractional abundance of The tracer fraction ( The tracer derived N in the soil N pool ( The Total  The Power Soil DNA Isolation kit (MoBio Laboratories Inc. Carlsbad, CA, U.S.A.) was used for the isolation of genomic DNA from the soil. A Mini Bead-Beater (BioSpec Products, Inc; speed of 6 m s Bacterial communities were analysed using the nested PCR approach ( Quantitative PCR was performed with an ABI Step One (Applied Biosystems) by using SYBR green as the detection system in a reaction mixture of 20 μl containing 10 μl of FastStart Universal Sybr Green Master, ROX (ROCHE, France), 1 μl of each primer (10 ng μl Extraction of ergosterol was based on Significant differences among the sites (PL, CT and UA) were examined for the basic chemical and biochemical soil parameters and quantity of fungi using one way ANOVA (Statistica 9.1, Statsoft, Inc.) and the multiple comparison of means (Tukey HSD tests). Significant differences among the sites (PL, CT and UA) for A unimodal type of constrained ordination, canonical correspondence analysis (CCA, Canoco 4.5, The soils were acidic at all study sites with a The addition of ∼1 μmol of N g Total recovery of added Added During the subsequent incubation, labile The transformation of The The transformation of During the incubation, the Glycine accounted for more than 50% of the direct total A proportion of added Added N forms were directly taken up by microbes in a molar ratio (glycine-N:N–NH Fungal abundance was higher in the UA than in the PL and CT soils ( The multivariate analysis of the bacterial community clearly structure showed a separation of PL, CT and UA ( The microbial N pool was by far largest biologically active pool in the studied soils, which corresponds to other studies ( Simple organic N molecules have been shown to be the major source of N while mineral N forms usually account for a smaller proportion of N uptake ( Amino acids taken up by microorganisms are used as N and C sources, being partly incorporated into proteins and partly deaminated inside the cell. Surplus N is released as N–NH The microbial immobilization of mineral N expressed as a percentage of added N displayed considerably different pattern in the studied soils ( This apparently contributed to its larger immobilization as relative immobilization of ammonium was rather small ( Negligible N–NO  The studied sites undoubtedly differed in their soil microbial community composition ( The increased residual N pool during incubation of the mineral N treatments was surely of microbial origin. However, based on the quickness of N–NH The abiotic immobilization of nitrate into DON has been described as a common process in many soils. However, the mechanism is still not clear. Different ranges of nitrate abiotic disappearance have been confirmed for different forest soil types from no immobilization to ∼60% and from 15 min to 24 h ( The information about the microbial N immobilization in N saturated soils is scarce, because it has been for a long time neglected. Nevertheless, using The difference in microbial N immobilization was linked to CN stoichiometry, C availability and composition of microbial community on one hand and to N leaching from the soil on the other. C availability appears to be the most important factor that suppresses microbial mineral N immobilization, increases N mineralization and shifts the immobilization to mineralization equilibrium towards mineralization, which enhances N leaching from the soil. Our results coincide with This study was conducted within the framework of the project “What are the main mechanisms affecting N flow through soil N pools in N saturated mountain soils?” supported by Grant Agency of