Solvent extraction (SX) has come to be one of the most important separation processes in hydrometallurgy. Phosphorus-based extractants have proved to be of particular importance, especially for the separation of cobalt from nickel. However it was not until the dialkyl phosphinic acid reagent, CYANEX 272, and its dithio analogue CYANEX 301, became available that liquors containing very low Co:Ni ratios of at least 1:40 to even >1:100 could be treated. This has opened the way to the direct application of SX for the separation of Co from Ni in liquors derived from the leaching of nickel mattes from the smelting of nickel sulphide ores and from the pressure acid leaching of nickel laterite ores. This paper describes the development of the range of Cytec extractants and, in particular, discusses the development of their application for the separation of cobalt from nickel. Examples of actual industrial operating plants will also be given and individual flowsheets discussed.Solvent, or liquid–liquid, extraction has come to be one of the most important separation processes in hydrometallurgy. It is now used somewhere around the world in the hydrometallurgical processing of Cu, Ni, Co, Zn, U, Mo, W, V, Zr, Hf, Nb, Ta, rare earths, Ga, Ge, the platinum group metals (PGMs), B, reprocessing of nuclear fuels, purification of wet process phosphoric acid, nitric acid recovery, etc. Solvent extraction (SX) in hydrometallurgy began in 1942 in the Manhattan project where ether was used as the extracting solvent for the recovery and purification of uranium from nitric acid solution. Ether was however soon replaced with tributyl phosphate (TBP) as the solvent for the extraction of uranyl nitrate. The SX process was then applied to the recovery of uranium from sulphuric acid liquors produced in the leaching of uranium ores in the 1950s using extractants such as alkyl amines and di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA). Thus the utility of extractants based on phosphorus-containing compounds was established early on in SX history. The process of SX was by this time also being applied to the separation and recovery of more exotic metals such as Zr/Hf and Nb/Ta. However it was not until the development of the hydroxyoxime extractants by what was then General Mills Inc. in the 1960s and their application in the recovery of copper from the sulphuric acid solutions produced in copper oxide ore heap leaching that the major breakthrough came in the application of the SX process in large scale hydrometallurgical processing of base and transition metals. Nowadays a very large number of extractants are available for use in hydrometallurgy with more than 40 reagents on offer, of which at least a dozen are in everyday use. A listing of commercial and development reagents is given in Note that the Daihachi reagents DP-8R, DP10-R and TR-63 are DEHPA, bis-isodecyl phosphoric acid and bis-isostearyl phosphoric acid, respectively. CYANEX 272 is bis(2,4,4 trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid and CYANEX 302 and 301 are respectively the mono and dithio analogues of CYANEX 272. PIA-8 is di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphinic acid. SFI-6 is dihexyl sulphide. In recent years there has been some significant changes in suppliers and availability of supply. Thus Hoechst, now Clariant, no longer supply their Hostarex range of reagents so they are not included in The starting point for the CYANEX range of extractants is phosphine, PH The ability to produce phosphine commercially opened up the way for the production of a whole range of derivatives either by the acid catalysed addition of phosphine to an aldehyde or by free radical addition to an olefin as has been discussed by Rickelton Formation of mono and dialkyl phosphine oxides, i.e. (C The thio-analogue can be made easily by reaction of the trialkyl phosphine with elemental sulphur instead of hydrogen peroxide. The phosphinic acids are made by using mono-dialkyl phosphine derivative mixtures and treating this with hydrogen peroxide. From the resulting product the mono acid is removed by caustic scrubbing and the major impurity in the dialkyl phosphinic acid is the corresponding trialkyl phosphine oxide. The thio analogues of the phosphinic acids can be made by treating the dialkyl phosphine derivatives with elemental sulphur and NaOH to form the sodium salts which can then be converted to the acids by treatment with mineral acid. The range of CYANEX SX reagents are given in The large commercial use of phosphine derivatives in SX is concerned with uranium extraction and recovery, the separation of cobalt from nickel and the recovery of acetic acid from waste liquors. The uses and potential uses of the CYANEX range of reagents is discussed for each extractant. The trialkyl phosphine oxides and sulphide are solvating extractants. Trialkyl phosphine oxides can extract both acids and metal complexes while trialkyl phosphine sulphides can extract metal complexes. Thus their extraction chemistry is as shown, first for acids and secondly for metal complexes. Because of the increasingly polar nature of the phosphoryl group the solubility of neutral organophosphorus compounds in water decreases in the following order: Phosphine oxides The order of basicity is the same as above. Thus the trialkyl phosphine oxides are the most basic of this class of solvating extractants. To date the most important applications of CYANEX 921, otherwise known as trioctyl phosphine oxide or TOPO, and CYANEX 923 have been in the recovery of acetic acid from effluents and in the recovery of uranium from wet process phosphoric acid and for the treatment of rare earths arising in phosphoric acid liquors produced in the Odda process for the treatment of apatite rock. While the recovery of acetic acid is somewhat outwith the scope of this paper, this application can be exemplified by the plant at Lenzing in Austria where 30 v/o of CYANEX 921 in undecane is used to recover not only acetic acid but also furfural from the aqueous effluents from the plant. Distillation of the organic phase yields an azeotrope of water, acetic acid and furfural which is further distilled to yield pure glacial acetic acid and furfural which are sold. Thus the cost of effluent treatment has been converted into a business opportunity by the use of this Cytec reagent. The advantages of CYANEX 921 in this application over CYANEX 923 lie in low solubility losses, high stability during distillation at elevated temperatures and high extraction coefficients for acetic acid in comparison to other solvating reagents. As a consequence, plant operating and capital costs are minimised. On the other hand, if CYANEX 923 was used in place of CYANEX 921 advantage would lie in the ability of the former to use a concentrated and low freezing point solvent resulting in higher acetic acid recoveries and thus leading to lower staging requirements. The application of TOPO in the recovery of low concentrations of uranium (100–200 mg/l) which occurs naturally in wet process phosphoric acid liquors stemmed from R&D carried out at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Tennessee, in the mid to late 1960s The major plants using this technology were located in Florida although there was a plant operated by Prayon in Belgium. These plants are now all closed. CYANEX 923 is also useful for the extraction of rare earths from nitrate solutions. A systematic study of this process has been carried out by Chu et al. The commercial application of CYANEX 923 for the bulk extraction of rare earths from phosphoric acid liquors arising in Norsk Hydro’s Odda process has been described by Al-Shawi et al. CYANEX 923 has also been studied as a replacement solvent for the methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) normally used in the separation of Nb/Ta by SX The removal of As, Sb and Bi with several extractants including CYANEX 923 has been studied by Cox et al. CYANEX 923 has also been proposed for mineral acid recovery. Although not applied commercially as yet, the potential of this reagent for this purpose has been discussed by Rickelton One potential disadvantage of the process is the dilution of sulphuric acid which occurs whence the acid is extracted from a feed containing 175 g/l H Further data for sulphuric acid and hydrochloric acid are contained in a Cytec brochure Work carried out by Tecnicas Reunidas on the recovery of nitric acid and HF from spent stainless steel pickling baths has been presented at a European Commission TRAWMAR meeting in Rhodes in 1998. In this work The thio analogue of tributyl phosphine oxide is CYANEX 471X. This extractant is in commercial use for silver recovery although no details of this application are available. It is, however, known that silver can be extracted from sulphate or nitrate solutions by sulphur-containing extractants. Thus information developed by Cytec on the selective extraction of silver from nitrate solution with CYANEX 471X is available in the literature The extraction of palladium with CYANEX 471X has much improved kinetics compared with the dialkyl sulphides used commercially thus offering the opportunity for countercurrent separation and recovery of palladium from platinum compared with the batch process required for the dialkyl sulphides. Unfortunately low solubility of the Pd-CYANEX 471X complex has so far hindered the commercial use of this extractant for this duty. Acids extract metal ions by a cation exchange mechanism viz.: The best known of all Cytec’s CYANEX range of reagents is CYANEX 272. This reagent, bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid, developed specifically for the separation of cobalt from nickel by SX from weakly acidic sulphate liquors, became available in the early 1980s and an excellent description of its utility in this application has been published The separation and recovery of cobalt from nickel in sulphate solutions has long been a problem for hydrometallurgists. For such a separation a cation exchanger is required as neither metal forms sulphato complexes and thus cannot be extracted by anion exchangers or solvating extractants. This may be compared with chloride solutions wherein cobalt forms anionic chloro complexes which are extractable by anion extractants. Nickel does not form such complexes and this forms the basis of the SX separations operated commercially by Falconbridge Nikkelwerk in Norway, Eramet in France and Sumitomo in Japan Separation of cobalt from nickel in weakly acid sulphate solutions had traditionally been difficult. Commercially available extractants such as carboxylic acids, hydroxyoximes and β-diketones all show marginal selectivity for Ni(II) over Co(II). This problem remained unsolved until it was realised This remarkable variation in separation factor is due to a change in the nature of the cobalt complex in the organic phase, whereby with increasing temperature and cobalt concentration, the pink hydrated/solvated octahedral complex changes into the blue anhydrous/unsolvated tetrahedral polymeric species. No such behaviour is shown by nickel which remains in the hydrated/solvated octahedral form throughout. Thus the distribution coefficient for cobalt increases as the degree of conversion to the tetrahedral form increases thus increasing the separation factor of cobalt from nickel. Specific separation factor values will also depend on the degree of steric hindrance caused by the degree and location of branching of the alkyl chains in the extractant molecule. The extraction pH is determined by the acid strength. This is demonstrated by comparing CYANEX 272 with 2,4,4-trimethylpentylphenyl phosphinic acid which shows a clear reduction in the pH of 50% extraction of all metal ions compared to CYANEX 272 Apart from the high Co/Ni selectivity, another key factor which distinguishes CYANEX 272 from its competitors is its ability to extract Co selectively from Ca thus eliminating the possibility of the formation of gypsum cruds on stripping cobalt from the organic phase with sulphuric acid. A comparison of the selectivity series for the extractants listed in Unfortunately none of these extractants can extract cobalt selectively from ferric iron. However, unlike DEHPA which requires 6 N HCl to strip any coextracted iron, CYANEX 272 can be readily stripped with relatively dilute (150 g/l) H Extraction and stripping kinetics for CYANEX 272 are similar to those of the other organophosphorous acids. Thus, in general, a 3 minute residence time for both extraction and stripping is considered adequate. Operating plants treat a wide variety of solutions derived from such sources as high grade nickel mattes and nickel laterite ores. This results in a large variation in the Co:Ni ratio in the feed liquors ranging from 20 to 30 g/l each Co and Ni to 0.5–2.0 g/l Co and 90–110 g/l Ni. Only CYANEX 272 can treat Ni:Co ratios as high as >100:1 as shown in Thus the development of CYANEX 272 opened the way for direct SX of cobalt from liquors containing very disparate ratios of cobalt and nickel. The stability of the organic phase in cobalt extraction is an issue. This was first experienced at the Rustenburg Refiners cobalt SX plant in South Africa which uses DEHPA as the extractant where over time the separation factor for cobalt over nickel decreased and the phase separation became increasingly poor. Examination of the problem showed that carboxylic acids were present in the organic phase thus causing a significant reduction in separation factor and increasingly poor phase break. The ability of cobalt to act as an oxidising agent is well known so it was clear that the problem was due to cobalt catalysed oxidative degradation of the diluent. A study of this problem Following market introduction in 1982, there are now some 13 plants located in Western Europe, South America, Canada, Africa, China and Australia using CYANEX 272 for cobalt separation and recovery from nickel. Currently CYANEX 272 is used to produce approximately 50% of the cobalt in the Western world. Unfortunately operating companies have tended to regard the use of CYANEX 272 as confidential for competitive reasons and it is only recently that operating details of some of the newer plants have been published. Outokumpu Oy has published details of its CYANEX 272 cobalt SX plant at Harjavalta CYANEX 272 has also been specified as the reagent of choice for INCO’s Voiseys Bay project. The process CYANEX 272 has also been specified as the reagent of choice for two laterite PAL projects in Australia. Thus the Bulong project flowsheet, Cobalt together with the manganese and zinc present in the liquor is then extracted with CYANEX 272. Interestingly enough the nickel in the raffinate is extracted and separated from magnesium with a carboxylic acid, Versatic 10 While DEHPA was used for zinc removal from cobalt at Bulong, where zinc SX is followed by cobalt SX with CYANEX 272 it is better to use CYANEX 272 for selective removal of zinc from cobalt to avoid the possibility of cross contamination of reagents and that has been adopted at the Murrin Murrin plant in Western Australia. In the Murrin Murrin project flowsheet It is interesting to compare the operating philosophies for Bulong and Murrin Murrin. At Bulong, because nickel was recovered by electrowinning, the Co extraction circuit is basically an impurity removal step in order to provide as pure a nickel stream as possible to the nickel SX circuit, then the CYANEX 272 plant is run to maximise the amount of cobalt recovered. At Murrin Murrin however, as a small amount of cobalt in the nickel feed to pressure hydrogen reduction will not affect the quality of nickel powder produced but a small amount of nickel in the cobalt strip will affect the quality of cobalt produced by pressure hydrogen reduction, then the CYANEX 272 circuit is run to minimise the amount of nickel reporting to the cobalt strip. The use of CYANEX 272 for zinc removal has also been adopted by QNI at the Yabulu plant in Queensland, Australia CYANEX 272 has also been selected for cobalt recovery in the absence of nickel in Morocco Alkyl phosphorous acids are used widely for rare earth extraction and separation, particularly DEHPA and PC88A, Ionquest 807 and P507. CYANEX 272 has not been used commercially although in some cases this reagent exhibits higher selectivity than its phosphoric and phosphonic acid counterparts. CYANEX 272 unfortunately has significantly lower loading capacities and distribution coefficients for rare earths than the alkyl phosphoric or phosphonic acids. However it has been found Cyanex 301, the dithio analogue of CYANEX 272, has been selected as the extractant for bulk extraction of nickel and cobalt in INCO’s Goro project in New Caledonia CYANEX 302 has not so far found true commercialisation. However it was used, albeit briefly, for cobalt separation and recovery from lithium in the process originally developed by Pacific Rare Metals Industries in the Philippines for reprocessing lithium-ion battery scrap The range of Cytec’s CYANEX extractants and their applications in hydrometallurgy has been fairly fully described above. From this it is clear that currently the major applications for the trialkyl phosphine oxides is in environmental applications for the recovery of organic acids rather in hydrometallurgy and the commercial application of CYANEX 921 at Lenzing in Austria demonstrates this conclusion nicely. However in the past these oxides have been used quite extensively for uranium recovery from wet process phosphoric acid and it is only the oversupply of uranium that has caused this application to cease. The use of CYANEX 923 for rare earth extraction from nitrate solutions has been well demonstrated commercially. Again supply issues has caused this activity to cease. However it is possible that the application of this extractant for this purpose may well reappear in the future. The ability of CYANEX 923 to extract mineral acids is a most interesting capability and it is possible that such an application may well take place in future, thus providing added flexibility to hydrometallurgical flowsheets where strong acid treatment is required, thus avoiding expensive neutralisation although co-extraction of metals as anionic complexes may occur. CYANEX 923 has also been considered as the extractant for removal of sulphuric acid from copper electrowinning tankhouse electrolyte bleeds as opposed to electrorefinery spent electrolytes and its performance compared with tris(2-ethylhexyl)amine Without a doubt CYANEX 272 is the reagent of choice for the separation and recovery of cobalt from nickel. The reasons for this are very clear namely that it is the only reagent that can effectively separate Co from Ni at low Co:Ni ratios of >1:40, and it is the only reagent amongst the organophosphorous acids that will extract Co selectively from both calcium and magnesium. Because it is the weakest acid amongst the organophosphorous acids, it is the easiest to strip and the acidity of the strip liquor is ideal for cobalt electrowinning. Also ferric iron does not poison this reagent as it does for DEHPA and indeed good iron/zinc separation from cobalt is possible with CYANEX 272 and this has been exploited at the QNI plant at Yabulu in Australia. The ability to achieve good zinc/cobalt separation with CYANEX 272 is also exploited commercially at Murrin Murrin in Australia thus avoiding the need to use a different extractant and the risk of cross contamination. Indeed it would be advantageous for the two cobalt plants in Zambia There are currently many new nickel sulphide and laterite projects under study. Several of them will consider SX separation and recovery of cobalt and nickel using CYANEX 272. Thus projects such as Ambatovy in Madagascar (a joint venture between Dynatec of Canada and Phelps Dodge of USA), Weda Bay in Halamahera, Indonesia and Syerston in New South Wales, Australia all provide potential applications for CYANEX 272 and there are other, less well developed projects which also offer opportunities for application of CYANEX 272. Currently the use of CYANEX 301 in INCO’s Goro project is unique. It remains to be seen if other applications can be found for this most interesting extractant. Unfortunately, unless some way of stabilising CYANEX 302 can be found, the one step, irreversible decomposition of this extractant is likely to militate against its commercial use in the immediate future. With regard to new reagents, the willingness to prepare novel dialkyl phosphinic acids is clearly shown by reference 17. Further new, novel reagents will be eagerly anticipated. In conclusion therefore it is clear that Cytec’s CYANEX range of extractants have found very important applications in hydrometallurgy. This situation is not likely to change in future and indeed it is more than likely that the percentage of the Western World’s cobalt that is treated by CYANEX 272 will continue to increase as it is clearly the reagent of choice for the separation and recovery of cobalt from nickel particularly when the ratio of nickel to cobalt is high which is always the case when the hydrometallurgical treatment of nickel sulphide and nickel laterite ores in sulphate media is contemplated.