A thermodynamic model was developed to associate the agglomeration tendency with the inherent properties of bed materials. Solid surface energy of metallic iron was calculated by the elastic modulus and lattice constant. Based on the relationship between solid surface energy and temperature, the thermodynamic spontaneity for particle agglomeration was explained, and the limiting temperature to defluidize was determined in a good agreement with the experimental data. Consequently, a criterion for the defluidization was proposed as a reference to select the bed materials.Due to limiting the continuous operation and high productivity of process, the high-temperature agglomeration/defluidization in fluidized beds has received extensive research attention in many industry fields, such as metallurgical and mineral processes Many mathematical models have been developed to simulate the defluidization behavior at high temperatures, especially to predict the operating conditions where defluidization occurred in fluidized beds Therefore, this work attempts to establish a relationship between the agglomeration tendency and the inherent properties of bed materials. The solid surface energy as a function of temperature is calculated by the elastic modulus and lattice constant. Based on this, a model is developed to predict the thermodynamic spontaneity for particle agglomeration in a fluidized bed, by which a criterion for the defluidization is proposed as a reference to select the bed materials. High purity iron powders (> Surface energy is one of the most fundamental parameters directly related to the binding forces of the solid material According to the definition, the surface tension was equal to the energy to rebuild two new surfaces after separating a solid into two parts. If considering surface separation as a continuous process, the surface tension of solids was represented as: Taking Eq. According to this calculation, the solid surface energy of materials was related to its bulk properties. As shown in Eq. For most metallic materials, the elasticity modulus depended on the inter-atomic bonding force and decreased with increasing temperature. Besides of the elastic strain, the dislocation motion also occurred inside metals due to the thermal activation within the elastic range at high temperature, leading to local small plastic strain. Thus, the empirical correlation of elasticity modulus and temperature for Fe, Al and low-carbon steel was expressed as To obtain the lattice constants as a function of temperature, The linear trend of the bcc lattice parameter as a function of temperature was related to the intrinsic nature of thermal expansion as a result of increasing atomic thermal vibrations from their equilibrium positions Consequently, by combining Eqs. For the whole fluidized bed system, the change of Gibbs free energy was expressed as: Differentiating with respect to Thermodynamically, a single particle or granular group tended to a state in which the total energy of the system was minimization. When the state of granular group in a fluidized bed transformed from normal fluidization to defluidization, agglomeration and sintering between particles occurred. In this process the total superficial area of the system was decreased. According to Based on this model, solid surface energy was associated with the inherent properties of bed materials. The thermodynamic conditions of defluidization in a fluidized bed were theoretically determined by the relationship between solid surface energy and temperature. Thus, a criterion for the defluidization was proposed as followed: For a given bed material, the granular group tended to stable fluidization if In this study, the solid surface energy of metallic iron was calculated by the elastic modulus and lattice constant, which increased with increasing temperature. Based on thermodynamic analysis, a model was developed to predict the spontaneity for particle agglomeration. Thus, the relationship between the agglomeration tendency and the inherent properties of bed materials was established. For a given bed material, the fluidization state tended to be stable if This work was financially supported by the