The photochemical decolorization of coffee effluent has been examined by photo-Fenton (UV/Fe2+/H2O2) process. Effects of UV light intensity, initial coffee concentration, iron dose and H2O2 dose on the color removal of model coffee effluent have been investigated. The rate of decolorization increased with decreasing initial coffee effluent concentration. It was found that the Fe ion dose and UV light intensity enhanced the decolorization rate. The decolorization process of coffee effluent could be divided into three established phases. At the beginning of the photo-Fenton process, the instantaneous and significant increase in color of the solution was found (Phase-I). In the subsequent phase (Phase-II), the decolorization rate was initially fast and subsequently decreased. In Phase-III, the rate was accelerated and then the complete decolorization of model coffee effluent was achieved. In order to elucidate the mechanisms of coffee effluent color removal process, the concentration changes in Fe3+ and Fe2+ besides H2O2 were measured during the course of the photo-Fenton process. The rate-determining step in Phase-II was the photo-Fenton reaction or photoreduction of Fe3+. On the other hand, the decolorization process in Phase-III was highly affected by Fenton reaction or decomposition of H2O2 with Fe2+. About 93% mineralization of 250mgL−1 model coffee effluent was achieved after 250min. A comparative study for TiO2, ZnO and photo-Fenton oxidation processes has been also carried out and the photo-Fenton process was found to be the most effective for color removal of coffee effluent.absorbance of coffee effluent maximum absorbance observed at the initial reaction stage concentration of coffee in effluent (mg concentration of iron ion in coffee effluent (mg concentration of hydrogen peroxide in solution (mg concentration of titanium dioxide in coffee effluent (mg concentration of zinc oxide in coffee effluent (mg rate constant of zero-order kinetics with respect to rate constant of first-order kinetics with respect to absorbance (min rate constant of second-order kinetics with respect to absorbance (min light intensity at light source per unit length (W time (min) initial concentration Coffee effluent contains a large amount of dark brown pigments. When intensely dark brown colored coffee effluent is released in aquatic system, it cuts off light due to its intense dark brown color and affects photosynthesis. Furthermore, its high organic load causes eutrophication. Coffee wastewater from coffee manufactures is similar in color and consistency to a cup of very weak black coffee. High levels of BOD and foul smell of wastewater from coffee plants create pollution problems. A large volume of this wastewater is released from the wet processing in coffee production (e.g., Coffee melanoidins have high antioxidant activity and scavenge hydroxyl radicals ( We have investigated the influence of various operating parameters on the color removal of coffee effluents. Literature review indicates that little information is available on the photo-Fenton reaction mechanism for color reduction of coffee effluents. Therefore, we have measured the concentration changes in Fe Synthetic or model brown-colored coffee effluents were prepared in laboratory by dissolving commercial instant coffee powder, Nescafe Goldblend Reagent grade hydrogen peroxide (30% solution), iron(II) sulfate heptahydrate (FeSO ZnO powder (the average particle diameter of 0.8 Experiments were carried out in a Pyrex glass cylindrical reactor of 0.10 All experiments were carried out without adding any buffers for pH adjustments during the decolorization process. The UV light irradiation sources were four 15 Samples from the liquid phase were withdrawn at predetermined time intervals using a gas-tight syringe. In order to remove fine solids (ferric oxyhydroxides, iron complexes, etc.), the sample was filtered with a membrane filter before measuring the solution absorbance and TOC. The color of the solution changed from dark brown and yellow to clear and colorless during the decolorization process. Coffee effluent decolorization was measured as the decrease in color density at 400 Fenton reactions were initiated by addition of known amount of H The TOC of the solutions was measured using a TOC analyzer (TOC– The concentration of hydrogen peroxide in the sample solutions was measured by the method which is an application of the glucose oxidase (GOD) method used to measure glucose concentration in serum, plasma or urine ( The concentrations of total Fe ion and Fe Typical results for the coffee effluent decolorization processes are depicted in With no light irradiation or in the dark, the decolorization was rather slow and 40% of color removal was completed after 240 In the presence of only UV light and H As shown in The hydroxyl radical generated in Fenton reaction is due to iron catalyzed decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. In photo-Fenton process which combines UV, Fe(III) and H This reaction is followed by Reaction (1) and iron cycle between Fe(II) and Fe(III) occurs by the light irradiation. In other words, Fe As mentioned above, iron is cycled between the +2 and +3 oxidation states. Fe(II) is not depleted and the production of It can be seen from The decolorization process in Phase-III obeyed first-order kinetics with respect to the concentration or absorbance of the coffee. The slope of a straight line for a plot of ln{(Abs)/(Abs) Hydrogen peroxide concentration continued to decline during the decolorization process ( Effects of UV light intensity on the color removal process are illustrated in It is probable that the increase in the UV light intensity resulted in the substantial increase in the number of In The effects of initial Fe concentration on color removal rate were investigated by varying its amount from 0 to 28.0 It has been known that addition of H The decline in absorbance may be partially attributed to partial degradation of organic compounds but no full mineralization of them. In order to investigate the mineralization process of coffee effluent, the TOC removal of the effluent was measured under different conditions. The typical results presented in Although a rigorously fair comparison is impossible, we compared the color removal efficiency of the photo-Fenton process with those of TiO The present results suggest that the UV/Fe The increase in UV light power resulting in the faster photo-Fenton reaction or the enhancement of The mineralization of 250 It was found that the rate of decolorization by ZnO photocatalyst was slow as compared with that by the photo-Fenton reaction and only 55% of decolorization was achieved in 280 The application of other oxidants and light wavelengths will be examined to discuss more effective operating conditions for the decolorization process of coffee effluents in our future studies. Furthermore, the measurement of photon flux entering the photoreactor is one of our future research subjects. It may be useful to elucidate complicated kinetics of coffee effluent decolorization in more detail.