The mechanism of bolt support is an important topic in mining engineering and slope treatment. The artificial material and loading system were self-developed to study the influence of bedding cohesion and bolt number on the anchoring behavior of bedded rock mass. The results show that, both peak strength and elasticity modulus increase gradually with the increase of bedding cohesion and bolt number. The axial stress–strain curve of bedded rock mass under the reinforcement of bolts presents the features of strain-softening and secondary strengthening. Finally, anchoring behavior of bedded rock mass with different bolt numbers was simulated by using FLAC3D numerical program and the results were compared with the experimental results. This study can provide certain bases to the stability control and support design of bedded rock mass in roadway.In view of the exhaustion of shallow resources in recent years, the resource exploitation and space development gradually have been transferred to the deep earth Bolt support, as one of the most common support methods, has been widely applied in mining engineering, slope treatment, and so on. Bolt support has the advantages of high efficiency, low cost and easy operation The coal-bearing strata usually show a bedded feature. Meanwhile, deep roadway often appears the phenomenon of wall caving, which leads to bedded feature of surrounding rock mass In this paper, river sand, cement and land plaster are selected to prepare the artificial material to simulate the sandy mudstone in Pingdingshan No. 12 coalmine. According to the tentative tests, the ratio of 3:0.6:0.4 for the above three materials was determined. Teflon film is chosen to simulate the bedding plane in rock mass. Owing to the weak bonding power between Teflon film and cementing material, the bedding mechanical behavior can be adjusted by the laying area of Teflon film.  The rock mass specimens are designed as a cuboid shape, with the width of 150 mm, the thickness of 150 mm and the height of 300 mm. Five bedding planes are evenly prepared in the rock mass, with the bedding distance of 25 mm. In this paper, four different levels of bedding cohesion (i.e. 0 MPa, 0.06 MPa, 0.12 MPa and 0.18 MPa) are experimented to study the influence of bedding cohesion on the strength and deformation behaviors of bedded rock mass. The bolts are arranged in the prepared rock mass specimens, which are perpendicular to the bedding planes, as shown in After excavation, the initial stress distribution of surrounding rock mass in deep roadway is broken. The stress state starts to change from three-dimensional stress to approximate two-dimensional stress. Selecting a small block as the analysis object, it can be approximatively considered as the stress state, which is shown in Before loading, vaseline is smeared on the ends of specimens to avoid the effect of friction on the experimental results. The displacement-controlled condition is used to the axial stress, with the loading rate of 0.5 mm per minute. In the loading process, the computer automatically collects the data of axial stress and axial strain.  With an increase in bedding cohesion, the peak strength increases gradually. As the bedding cohesion is increased from 0 MPa to 0.18 MPa, the peak strength increases from 4.25 MPa to 4.87 MPa for the two bolts and from 4.65 MPa to 5.19 MPa for the three bolts, with the increase extents of 14.59% and 11.61%, respectively. Under the reinforcement of two bolts, with the increase of bedding cohesion, elasticity modulus presents a gradually increasing trend. As the bedding cohesion increases from 0 MPa to 0.18 MPa, the elasticity modulus increases from 1.14 GPa to 1.35 GPa, with the increase extent of 18.42%. Under the reinforcement of three bolts, the elasticity modulus presents gentle change, which is equal to 1.44 GPa. With an increase in bedding cohesion, the residual strength increases from 3.70 MPa to 3.86 MPa for three bolts, while keeps generally stable of about 3.34 MPa for two bolts. In this paper, the difference of bedding cohesion is achieved by changing the area of Teflon film. In other words, the larger the bedding cohesion, the smaller the bedding area is, which would then lead to the increase of bearing capacity of bedded rock mass. This mechanism is similar to that of fissure length studied by Yang and Jing From From In order to investigate the features of strain-softening and secondary strengthening in depth, the softening factor and secondary strengthening factor are introduced respectively, as follows:  From FLAC3D is a numerical simulation software based on the finite-difference method. It is designed to solve the mechanical problem in the complicated geotechnical engineering. In the computational process, the global stiff matrix is replaced by the difference equation, which can effectively improve the precision and efficiency. In this paper, FLAC3D is used to investigate the strength and failure behaviors of bedded rock mass under compression. The 3D numerical model of bedded rock mass also contains three parts, i.e. rock material, bedding plane and bolt. Due to the gradual reduction of axial stress after peak point with the increase of axial strain in the experimental study, the strain-softening model is chosen to simulate the rock material, which is based on the Mohr–Coulomb criterion. The bedding plane is simulated by the interface model, with the constitutive model shown in   With the increase of bolt number, the peak strength of rock mass increases gradually. As the bolt number increases from 0 to 5, the peak strength increases from 3.77 MPa to 4.71 MPa, with the increase extent of 24.93%. The variation curve of peak strength with bolt number follows the Logistic function as shown in In FLAC3D, the increment of maximum shear strain can visually reflect the failure behavior of rock mass.  Both the peak strength and elasticity modulus of bedded rock mass increase gradually with the increase of bedding cohesion. However, the increase of bolt number weakens this influence of bedding cohesion. The axial stress–strain curves of bedded rock mass under the reinforcement of bolts present the features of strain-softening and secondary strengthening. Two quantitative factors are proposed to evaluate the softening and secondary strengthening characteristics. The peak strength of bedded rock mass follows the Logistic function with the bolt number. With an increase in bolt number, the failure mode of rock mass varies from independent yield of rock strata to the overall shear failure. In this study, based on the similarity theory, the mechanical behaviors of bedded rock mass under bolt reinforcement were investigated through experiments and FLAC3D numerical simulations with a model scale of 150 mm × 150 mm × 300 mm. However, scale effect plays a significant role in mechanics response and anchorage performance of rock mass. Obviously, more in-depth related studies need to be conducted in our future study. Financial supports for this work, provided by the