The encapsulation of genetically modified cells represents a promising approach for the delivery of therapeutic proteins. The functionality of the device is dependent on the characteristics of the biomaterials, the procedures used in its confection and the adaptability of the encapsulated cells in the host. We report conditions leading to the development of calcifications on the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) matrix introduced in hollow fiber devices for the encapsulation of primary human fibroblasts implanted in mice. The manufacturing procedures, batches of PVA matrix and cell lineages were assessed for their respective role in the development of the phenomenon. The results showed that the calcification is totally prevented by substituting phosphate-buffer saline with ultra-pure sterile water in the rinsing procedure of the matrix. Moreover, a positive correlation was found, when comparing two fibroblast cell lineages, between the level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity measured in the cells and the degree of calcium deposition. Higher LDH activity may decrease calcium depositions because it generates in the device a more acidic microenvironment inhibiting calcium precipitation. The present study defines optimized conditions for the encapsulation of primary human fibroblasts in order to avoid potentially detrimental calcifications and to allow long-term survival of encapsulated cells.Cell encapsulation aims to enclose viable cells within semi-permeable membranes. The main objective of this technology is to transplant cells across an immunological barrier without the use of immunosuppressive agents. In addition to the prevention of physical contact between enclosed cells and host immune cells, the properties of the selectively permeable membrane ensure the influx of molecules essential for cell survival and the outflow of metabolic end products and therapeutic molecules. Macroencapsulation technology was extensively studied as a sustained delivery system to provide biologically active molecules either systemically or in a site-specific manner. This cell therapy approach using immunoisolated genetically engineered cells was proposed for the improvement of conditions such as anemia The achievement of macroencapsulation technology requires to overcome many technical hurdles. These ranges from issues concerning the biocompatibility, geometry and physical characteristics of the device itself to the development of specific strategies for the generation and selection of cell clones capable of adapting to the microenvironment encountered in vivo after implantation. Moreover, the validation of specific standard operating procedures for the device assembly and cell loading are in fact central in the success of this technology. One of the recurrent questions in cell encapsulation concerns the cell density and its three-dimensional distribution into the device so that the metabolic exchanges required by the cells will meet with the transport capacity of the membrane walls. The appropriate cell density for optimal cell survival and efficient recombinant peptide production may vary greatly between cell types or even between clones of the same cell type. To overcome this problem, a variety of cell immobilization matrices have been developed to organize the cell mass within encapsulation devices. To simulate natural extracellular matrix, hydrogels and hydrocolloid-based encapsulation matrices such as collagens, alginate or chitosan were used to enclose hepatocytes Some of these biomaterials were shown, however, to develop calcifications in vivo that can dramatically compromise their function, as previously described for heart and vascular bioprostheses. The appearance and the mechanisms of calcification were therefore extensively studied in various biomaterials, such as collagen sponges The present study was motivated by the observation of calcifications appearing in vivo in PVA matrix used for the encapsulation of human primary fibroblasts into hollow fibers. Furthermore, it was noticed that the incidence of calcifications varied also between cell lineages of fibroblasts. The results of this study demonstrate that the appearance of calcifications could be essentially linked to the washing procedure of the PVA matrix previously used in the assembly process of the devices. Human primary fibroblasts DARC3.1 and DARC3.2 are two cells lineages derived from the foreskin of a 3-year-old healthy male donor found negative for human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), human papillomavirus (HPV), hepatitis viruses B and C (HBV and HCV), cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein Barr virus (EBV). They were isolated from a skin fragment of 2 Polyethersulfone (PES) hollow fibers (Azko Nobel Faser, Wupperthal, Germany), with a molecular weight cut-off of 280 DARC3.1 and DARC3.2 were harvested with 1:25 trypsin-EDTA solution and diluted with culture medium to obtain a suspension of 2.5×10 Adult male Balbc/ByJ nude mice and DBA/2J mice (Iffa Credo, Saint-Germain sur l’Abresle, France) were anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane (Forene, Abbott Ireland, Sligo, Republic of Ireland). Animals were placed in a prone position for surgery. The capsules were subcutaneously implanted in the dorsal flank of the animals through a 14G Abbocath catheter (Abbott). The entry site in the skin was closed using a non-resorbable suture (Prolene 6/0, Johnson and Johnson Intl, European Logistics Center, Brussels, Belgium). Upon recovery, the animals were returned to the animal care facilities where they had access to food and water ad libitum. The experiments were performed according to a protocol approved by our local Committee on Animal Experimentation, in agreement with the Swiss Federal Law. After 1 month in vivo, the capsules were retrieved and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde with 1% glutaraldehyde for 3 Histological sections were scored blindly by five independent observers, using an arbitrary scale from 0 to 6 for the evaluation of both calcium deposits onto the PVA and cell survival. For each group, the averages of the different capsules, based on the mean individual scores, were reported on graphs±s.e.m. The data obtained were analyzed for statistical significance between the various groups using an analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Fischer's PLSD post hoc test. A DARC3.1 and DARC3.2 cells were harvested with 1:25 trypsin-EDTA solution (GIBCO-BRL) and rinsed in culture medium without FCS. Fibroblasts were diluted in a buffer solution containing 220 The observation of calcifications present in PVA matrix of in vivo implanted devices containing human primary fibroblasts prompted us to assess whether procedures or materials used in the capsule fabrication could be responsible for their apparition. We noticed the use of a sterile PBS solution to rinse the PVA matrix rods before their insertion into the hollow fibers. Furthermore, a new batch of PVA foam from Ivalon ( In order to assess the role of a cellular component participating in the calcification process, mirror experiments were repeated either with another human primary fibroblast lineage (DARC3.2 cells) or, as control, with unloaded capsules. Again, calcium mineralization was absent in the PVA matrices washed in ultra-pure water, confirming the previous observation made with DARC3.1 cells ( In order to probe for a biological difference between DARC3.1 and DARC3.2 cells that could explain the higher degree of calcification observed with the latter cells, we hypothesized that the PBS-dependent calcium mineralization of the PVA surface may be due, in part, to a cell-specific difference in pH microenvironment. Hence, a difference in anaerobic metabolism between the two cell lineages, characterized by corresponding changes in the levels of lactic acid and thereby pH in the extracellular space, could influence calcium deposition. This hypothesis was assessed by measuring the relative activity of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in both fibroblast lineages. LDH measurement performed in four independent experiments pointed out that DARC3.1 cells showed a 1.5±0.1-fold higher activity than DARC3.2 fibroblasts. These results are therefore compatible with the hypothesis that hypoxic DARC3.1 cells, by producing a lower pH in the inner space of the capsule, might well restrict the calcium precipitation phenomenon. In order to test whether the presence of calcification could interfere with cell viability, the survival of encapsulated DARC3.1 and DARC3.2 fibroblasts was also evaluated in the same experiments. The cells enclosed in the hollow fibers containing a matrix of In order to evaluate the influence of the PVA matrix on the cell survival, DARC3.1 and DAC3.2 fibroblasts were loaded either in matrix-empty devices or in hollow fibers containing an The continuous delivery of biologically active molecules through the encapsulation of genetically engineered cells represents an attractive alternative for the treatment of diseases requiring repeated injections of therapeutic proteins The development of the PBS-dependent calcification was certainly favored by the fact that, after the rinsing step, the PVA rods were allowed to dry, generating a first deposition of crystal salts on the surface of the matrix. In addition, at the encapsulation stage, the fibers were directly loaded with cells without prior rinsing or ultrafiltration. The appearance of calcium deposits was therefore certainly due to the presence of microcrystals of phosphate on the matrix, which can act as nucleation factors for the precipitation of calcium into hydroxyapatite Other factors might have also influenced the formation of calcium deposits. The physical and chemical characteristics of the matrix, notably the substrate material and surface finishing of the PVA scaffold, may have contributed to the accumulation of phosphate and calcium ions on the polymer surface. This has been already described for other biomaterials, such as polytetrafluoroethylene and polyurethane The type of cells used for encapsulation was clearly playing a role in the formation of calcium deposits. In the present study, differences in the rate of calcifications were shown between the two tested lineages of fibroblasts, the DARC3.1 cells inducing less calcium deposits than DARC3.2 cells. The relative LDH activity in these cells indicated that DARC3.1 cells have a higher capacity to acidify their microenvironment than DARC3.2 cells. Indeed, LDH enzyme allows the cells to transform pyruvate into lactate, which, in turn, decreases the pH in the device space. This could well have hindered the calcification formation. In a second part of the study, the cell survival of both lineages encapsulated in hollow fibers containing either the PVA Rippey or the Ivalon matrix was evaluated after 1 month in vivo. No significant difference was observed when regarding the PVA washed in PBS or in sterile water. The calcifications did therefore not appear to be deleterious for the cell survival after 1 month. However, preliminary data at 3 months indicate that capsules with calcified PVA matrix showed increased cell death in comparison to capsules without calcium deposits (data not shown). This mineral accumulation might therefore be harmful to the encapsulated fibroblasts in the long term. The cell survival was then assessed according to the presence of the type of PVA used as a scaffold matrix. As already reported in previous studies, the presence of a matrix for the three-dimensional layout of the cells was shown to significantly preserve cell survival When comparing the cell survival according to the strain of mice, most of the histologies showed higher scores in nude mice than in DBA/2J mice. This result can be explained by the host immune response against the implanted cells despite the role of the capsule that acts as an immunological barrier. The results reported in the present study have clearly identified the PBS washing procedure as the main cause for the generation of calcium deposits in our device. Both the choice of the cell lineage and of the PVA batch appeared to influence the extent of mineral formation. These observations highlight the care that should be taken for any detail in the device manufacturing process in order to warrant successful cell viability and device functionality. The rinsing solution of the PVA matrix used as a support for encapsulated cells was shown to be the leading parameter of in vivo calcifications development on its surface. The substitution of PBS with ultra-pure sterile water totally prevented the phenomenon independently of the batch of PVA, the type of cells loaded into the capsule and even the presence of cells in the device. However, the type of cells and, in particular, their LDH activity may quantitatively influence the calcifications deposition by changing the microenvironment acidity. Although the calcium aggregates were shown to have no deleterious effect on the cell survival after 1 month in vivo, the prevention of crystals formation should optimize longer-term applications, using an internal matrix as a support for primary human fibroblasts survival. We thank Vivianne Padrun, Fabienne Pidoux, Maria Rey, Liliane Schnell and Laurence Winkel for expert technical assistance, as well as Dr Bernard Schneider for constructive discussions. This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation programs “Gene Therapy” (PNR 37) and “Implant and Transplant” (PNR 46), and by Modex Thérapeutiques Inc. Frank Schwenter is supported by the Roche Research Foundation M.D.–Ph.D. Program.