In many engineering applications such as mining, geotechnical and petroleum industries, drilling operation is widely used. The drilling operation produces sound by-product, which could be helpful for preliminary estimation of the rock properties. Nevertheless, determination of rock properties is very difficult by the conventional methods in terms of high accuracy, and thus it is expensive and time-consuming. In this context, a new technique was developed based on the estimation of rock properties using dominant frequencies from sound pressure level generated during diamond core drilling operations. First, sound pressure level was recorded and sound signals of these sound frequencies were analyzed using fast Fourier transform (FFT). Rock drilling experiments were performed on five different types of rock samples using computer numerical control (CNC) drilling machine BMV 45 T20. Using simple linear regression analysis, mathematical equations were developed for various rock properties, i.e. uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, density, and dominant frequencies of sound pressure level. The developed models can be utilized at early stage of design to predict rock properties.Drilling is one of the significant extraction methods in a wide range of engineering applications, which is basically accompanied by noise production. Noise/sound signals have been widely used in other areas of engineering applications. However, its application to mining, geotechnical and petroleum fields is very limited when determining the physico-mechanical properties of rocks prior to the onset of a project. The direct or conventional rock testing method generally is expensive and time-consuming with respect to the required high accuracy. According to   Later, As can be seen, most of the previous scholars utilized equivalent sound pressure level to predict physico-mechanical properties of rocks. Very few investigations were done on rock identification using frequency analysis. Earlier investigators have suggested more detailed works in this direction ( The tests were carried out on cubic rock samples of 20 cm in side length. A total of eight different rock samples were used in these tests, which were collected from different locations of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Karnataka of India. All the rock drilling tests were conducted using automated CNC drilling machine BMV 45 T20, as shown in Data acquisition is a process of measuring sound pressure level recorded with computer program. The data acquisition system consists of computer, microphone (G.R.A.S. 40PH), data acquisition card hardware (NI USB-9234 from National Instruments (NI)) along with Labview software. It is a more effective measuring instrument compared with traditional systems ( The compression testing machine AIM-317E-Mu was used for measurement of UCS of cylindrical rock samples as per International Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM) suggested methods ( The tensile strengths of the rock samples were determined indirectly by Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) testing machine as per the ISRM suggested methods ( The UCS of rock sample was determined as per the ISRM suggested methods ( Core samples of 54 mm in diameter (NX-size) having thickness approximately equal to sample radius were prepared as per the ISRM suggested methods ( The density of rock generally varies due to its porosity. The density of every core sample was determined after removal of moisture from it ( The experimental set-up for carrying out drilling comprises CNC machine on rock blocks and sound pressure level measurement, as shown in The FFT is a method known as fast computational algorithm for discrete Fourier transform (DFT). Using this algorithm, the time-domain signals can be transformed to frequency spectrum. It converts a signal into individual spectral components and thereby provides frequency information about the signals. The FFT representation of signals from time domain to frequency domain is given by The DFT maps divide time sequences into discrete frequency representations, which can be written as Acquired data from the microphone ( In selected rock blocks, the acoustic recording begins after the drill bit penetrates into the rock block as a conflict brink (the distance between the outermost point of a drill bit and the level that the entire surface of the rock will be involved with drill bit) distance. The sound signals during drilling were measured up to 40 s, 30 s, 24 s, 20 s and 17 s corresponding to ochre, bituminous coal, laterite, pink limestone, and iron stone, respectively. Sample lengths of durations 40 s, 30 s, 24 s, 20 s and 17 s were captured and used for frequency analysis. The time-domain plots are shown in The rock properties were determined as per the ISRM suggested methods, as listed in The drilling sound signals were analyzed using FFT after capturing the sound signals from rock drilling operations. The time-domain plots are shown in Five dominant frequencies were extracted from the FFT of each selected rock, where the highest sound pressure level (dB) was determined. These frequencies, called as dominant frequencies corresponding to each rock type, are given in After extraction of the rock dominant frequencies, simple linear regression analysis was performed on the relationship between rock physico-mechanical properties and dominant frequencies using SPSS statistics software. In the prediction model, rock properties were selected as dependent variables and frequency as independent variable. All the selected frequencies After development of the prediction model, three rock types (marble, moon white granite, and basalt) were used for validation. Estimation of the physico-mechanical properties of rocks in the shortest possible time is one of the important issues in mining, geotechnical and petroleum fields. The direct rock testing methods are expensive and time-consuming upon required accuracy. An attempt was made to quantify the rock properties using sound pressure level at dominant frequencies during the diamond core drilling operation. In this context, the acoustic frequencies were analyzed using FFT during drilling operations to predict the physico-mechanical properties of rocks, i.e. UCS, BTS and density in the shortest possible time. After analyzing sound signals, results show that there is a satisfactory mathematical relationship between physico-mechanical properties of rocks, i.e. UCS, BTS and density, and sound pressure level at the second, first and fourth dominant frequencies from rock drilling operations. The developed equations for quantification of rock properties can be used in field with an acceptable degree of accuracy. In the present work, prediction of the rock properties using frequency analysis technique was used in the diamond core drilling operation. It is suggested that the future investigation could be carried out in this direction using wavelet techniques for quantification of rock properties. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors would like to sincerely acknowledge the Center for System Design (CSD), National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal for providing data acquisition system (DAQ) for this work. The authors would also like to sincerely thank the anonymous reviewers for their suggestions which have improved the quality of the paper.