Tensile properties of pillared graphene block (PGB) nanostructure are studied in this paper. This nanostructure is composed of four pillared graphene nanostructures connected to each other in a special order which preserves the honeycomb molecular bond order of graphene. Molecular dynamics simulations using AIREBO potential are utilized to investigate the tensile properties and thermodynamic stability of the nanostructure. Four structural parameters are defined for PGB nanostructure. By assigning different values to these geometrical parameters, 28 prototypes are virtually produced. Potential energy profile of each sample is traced to evaluate thermodynamic stability. After relaxation of the nanostructures, virtual uniaxial tensile tests are applied to assess the tensile properties in three dimensions. Young's modulus, fracture strength and fracture strain for each sample are obtained. All samples are thermodynamically stable having high Young's modulus and fracture strength. The strongest sample has fracture strength of 21.5 GPa and Young's modulus of 144 GPa.Graphene is an allotrope of Carbon with sp There have been a considerable number of researches on constructing CNT-graphene hybrid nanostructures toward different scientific goals. For instance, mitigation of the adverse effects of defects on mechanical properties in graphene Among various attempts, one of the noticeable hybrid molecular structures that has been made based on the idea of combining CNT and graphene is called pillared graphene (PGN). PGN nanostructure is a hybrid carbon molecular structure composed of two graphene sheets connected to each other with carbon nanotubes. The connections are made by carbon–carbon covalent bonds. The first introduction of PGN was in order to present a novel nanostructure for hydrogen storage applications Paul et al. A number of researchers have investigated the mechanical properties of PGN nanostructures. Wang et al. Niu et al. Shahsavari In pillared graphene structures, inter-pillared distance (PD) and pillar length (PL) are two important parameters which directly influence mechanical and physical properties In this paper, we introduce a molecular structure of carbon named pillared graphene block (PGB) which is composed of PGN molecular structures. This hybrid carbon nanostructure is an attempt to upgrade the outstanding two-dimensional mechanical properties of PGN to three-dimensions. Thermodynamic stability and tensile properties of PGB nanostructure are investigated in this study using molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. Four structural parameters are defined and their effects on tensile properties are evaluated by uniaxial tensile test simulations. PGB nanostructure is a hybrid structure of carbon composed of CNT and graphene. It is made by 4 PGNs which are simply connected to each other via grapheme sheets. PGB is a hollow semi-cubic cell with a more complicated structure having more structural variables than that of PGN’s. A “C” code was used to produce PGB nanostructures. At the first step, two graphene sheets were virtually made with a certain distance between them. According to the position of the CNTs, the punches on graphene sheets are made by deleting the atoms of the graphene lattices. The CNTs are then fabricated to connect the graphene sheets. The code then cuts the residual atoms in interior graphene in the edges. After that, it copies the structure in order to make the other three faces of the nanostructure. The code checks the connections between the outer graphene sheets in the sides of the cell and then the interior graphene sheets in order to prevent formation of any defect in those areas. To achieve that goal, the code bends the graphene sheets or cuts one or two rows of atoms to fix the connections if it is needed (see The carbon nanotube we used for all PGB specimens is an armchair single walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) with the chirality of (12, 0). We chose the dimensions and structural variables presented in Investigation of stability and properties of graphene-CNT junctions has been an interesting topic for scientists in recent years LAMMPS (large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel simulator) The first term is the reactive empirical bond order (REBO) potential which has been used in MD simulations before AIREBO potential Before the tensile tests, each PGB sample is relaxed for 200 ns with Nose-Hoover thermostat under isothermal isobaric ensemble (NPT) at temperature of 300 K. Simulations are undertaken at zero pressure to avoid inelastic behavior in the stress–strain curves Virtual uniaxial tensile tests in x and y directions are carried out to evaluate tensile properties of the nanostructure (geometrical parameters are presented in Tensile tests were undertaken while using Nose-Hoover thermostat under isothermal isobaric ensemble (NPT) at temperature of 300 K and zero pressure Two areas were fixed in all degrees of freedom at the end of the samples perpendicular to the tensile directions during the tensile tests. Considering that the edges of the nanostructure deform during relaxation, we considered the thickness of the fixed areas as 10 Å to encompass the cross section in all samples. The tensile force was applied to all atoms in the surface even to those in the curvature of PGB edges. The tensile force was measured by monitoring the force in these two fixed areas. The stress was then calculated by using the initial surface of the cross section. In order to compute the strain, the momentary length in the tensile direction was obtained at each monitored deformation time-step. Young's modulus was obtained as the slope of engineering stress–strain curve in the strain range of 0 to 0.05 (i.e. linear in all curves). After relaxation of each of the 28 specimens for 200,000 time-steps, the uniaxial tensile tests were carried out in × and y directions. In order to evaluate the thermodynamic stability of PGB nanostructure, per-atom potential energy of each sample was monitored during the relaxation process, which was considered to be 200 ns. For a thermodynamically stable nanostructure, it is expected that per-atom potential energy achieves a constant value during the relaxation. Per-atom potential energy vs. time diagrams of the samples with N = 1 are presented in Since the sharp edges of primary PGB nanostructure have higher surface energy, in order to decrease the energy and achieve the thermodynamically stable state, they transform to curved regions during relaxation (see After relaxation, uniaxial tensile test was carried out in The conclusions of the uniaxial tensile tests for PGB samples are presented in According to Here, the term graphene sheet density (GSD) is used as the fraction of the cross section of the sample which is occupied by graphene sheets that withstand the applied load. E.g. the GSD in tensile tests in x direction is the fraction of the cross section perpendicular to x direction which is occupied by graphene sheets that bear the load in x direction. It has to be noted that GSD (graphene sheet density) should not be mistaken with graphene density of electronic states which is a quite different concept and is irrelevant to this study. According to the results, increase in PL leads to decrease in mechanical properties. By increasing PL in the nanostructure, the inner graphene sheets bearing the load will be smaller and the outer graphene sheets remain the same. That results in lower graphene sheets bearing the load i.e. lower GSD. According to As can be seen in F has two different effects on the nanostructure. On one hand, it enlarges the cross section of the nanostructure; as it was the case for PD. On the other hand, it changes the shape of the nanostructure. The surface area of PGB nanostructure decreases as a result of changing its shape from square to circle under constant graphene circumference ( Increasing PL brings about smaller interior graphene sheets in PGB nanostructure. It lowers the GSD in the cross section which leads to decrease in the tensile properties. According to the obtained results in In summary, density, Young's modulus and fracture stress of the nanostructure increase by decreasing PL or PGB size which has direct relation with PD, N and F. The Fracture strength and Young's modulus in According to   One of the considerable attempts to find new 3D all-carbon nanostructures with high mechanical properties is fullerene-nanotube nanotruss. The mechanical properties of the nanostructure are presented in  In this work a hybrid nanostructure, called PGB, is virtually made as a hollow semi-cube with pillared graphene faces, in order to achieve a three dimensional structure with a desirable rigidity and strength. Honeycomb molecular structure of graphene is preserved throughout the nanostructure including the CNT-graphene and graphene-graphene connections. Four structural parameters are defined and the effects of changing those parameters on mechanical properties are studied. All tests are carried out using molecular dynamics simulation method. Relaxation process is carried out and viability of all the samples is confirmed by their thermodynamic stability. The effective parameters on deformation of the nanostructures during the relaxation process are also discussed. After the relaxation, virtual uniaxial tensile tests in different geometrical directions were carried out. Young's modulus, fracture stress and fracture strain are calculated and represented. The obtained results revealed that the fracture stress is in the range of 7.9 GPa to 21.5 GPa in zigzag and 3.4 GPa to 13.3 GPa in armchair direction respectively. Young's modulus varies from 61 GPa to 144 GPa in zigzag and 24 GPa to 68 GPa in armchair direction, respectively. According to the results, high mechanical properties, low density and peculiar geometrical structure of PGB set this nanostructure in a special place in comparison with other CNT-graphene hybrid nanostructures. The potential applications can be in nanoelectronics, nanorobotics and construction of membranes. The cubic 3-dimensional structure of PGB can give the scientists the possibility to use this nanostructure as a building block for various applications in different fields of study. For instance, by repeating the structure in 2 dimensions and variation of the structural parameters, nanoporous membranes can be produced for filtration and separation applications. High mechanical properties of PGB can make possible the productions ultrathin membranes for different applications. Moreover, large voids in the nanostructure with tunable geometry can give the possibility to use functional groups to functionalize different parts of the nanostructure towards different scientific goals. The future planned work as the continuation of the current study is to evaluate the mechanical response of the larger 2D and 3D nanostructures build with PGB as the building block with different orientations and structural parameters. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of Dr. Mohammad Ganjtabesh and Dr. Abbas Nouzari Dalini Department of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science, Tehran University, Iran and Mr Aria Mansouri PhD candidate, Department of Chemical Engineering University of Houston USA. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: