The interfacial properties of the DEHiBA and DMDBTDMA extractant molecules used in the nuclear industry are examined to obtain a better understanding of ion transfer across the water/oil interface. Optical second harmonic generation (SHG) is used in combination with bulk nitric acid titration and interfacial tension (IFT) measurements. First, the amphiphilic properties of both extractant molecules are characterized by static IFT. Second, real time SHG experiments and titration are carried out to follow the kinetics of nitric acid extraction. The SHG intensity evolution is strongly dependant on the extractant concentration in the organic phase and the SHG intensity fluctuations are correlated with the nitric acid flux across the interface. It suggests that these intensity fluctuations are the signature of a strong modification of extractant concentration at the interface that is maximal close to a critical aggregation concentration of extractant in the organic phase.Phenomena occurring at the interface between two immiscible liquid phases are ubiquitous in nature and occurs in processes as diverse as liquid extraction, catalysis, membrane ion transfer or drug delivery, to mention only a few The main objective of this work is to extend the basic knowledge about the interface during the extraction phenomena. This work supplements a previous study DEHiBA has a branched alkyl chain on the carbonyl moiety and therefore a high affinity for tetravalent actinides with good U(VI)/Pu(IV) selectivity from nitric acid media. This molecule is a tertiary amide and also has some affinity for protons in concentrated aqueous nitric acid solutions DEHiBA, purified at 99.3%, was purchased from Pharmasynthèse (Lisses, France). DMDBTDMA was obtained from Panchim (France). Both were used as received. 65% nitric acid purum was purchased from Aldrich and also used as received. 99% dodecane was supplied by Aldrich, distilled in an all-glass apparatus and passed seven times through an alumina column to remove any active impurities All nitric acid concentrations were determined by pH-meter titration (809 Titrando, Metrohm) in the organic phase. Acid concentrations were evaluated for the entire range of the extractant concentrations and monitored in real time for the concentrations of interest. The IFT measurements were performed for the LL interface constituted of DEHiBA or DMDBTDMA dissolved in dodecane and acid aqueous solutions. All IFT measurements were performed by the drop shape method using a Krüss tensiometer. Before all measurements (except The details of the optical SHG setup have already been given elsewhere  The influence of nitric acid and DEHiBA on the water–dodecane IFT has been discussed in detail elsewhere Nevertheless, the IFT We have studied the nitric acid extraction by DEHiBA at various extractant concentrations below and above the CAC by the technique of SHG. Eight of these time evolutions are given in The major feature observed in There is an unambiguous evolution of the SHG intensity over time with the extractant concentration, indicating a modification of the molecular structure at the interface during the extraction process. It appears that the interfacial activity at the nanometer scale is strongly dependent on the bulk extractant concentration. An interesting point is that this evolution occurs for concentrations close to but generally slightly below the CAC. Above the CAC, the interface is known to be saturated by surface active agents, and at this stage we are unable to observe any interfacial activity. It is possible that the extraction process can then take place somewhere else, maybe at the newly-formed interfaces created by the aggregates or set of connections in the bulk and near the macroscopic interface An acid titration is presented in The major feature in Three decades ago, Condamines and Musikas  The effect of the acid addition is seen in The IFT is plotted versus time in In the first 250  The SHG signal intensity profile is comparable to those obtained for the monoamide with three apparent regimes shown in It is important to note that these fluctuations are not observed in the time-resolved IFT curve ( This work reports a study of the interfacial dynamics at the LL interface during ion extraction. The behavior of two extractants, DEHiBA and DMDBTDMA, at the water/oil interface is examined by SHG during nitric acid extraction. The nonlinear optical measurements are associated with bulk phase ion titration and IFT measurements. We show with DEHiBA that the transfer of nitric acid across the liquid/liquid interface generates fluctuations in the SHG signals. The intensity of these fluctuations depends on the extractant concentration in the organic phase and is correlated with the acid flux across the interface. Although we do not yet provide a clear molecular picture for those observations, these results suggest that the pathway for the nitric acid transfer across the interface is quite different near the DEHiBA CAC and far above the DEHiBA CAC. Additionally, this behavior appears to be general because similar high fluctuations on the SHG signal during HNO We are grateful to Thomas Zemb and Pierre Bauduin for stimulating discussions. We thank Laurence Berthon, Geoffroy Ferru and Marie-Christine Charbonnel for discussions about the monoamide, diamide and the extraction process and Daniel Meyer for fruitful discussions on ion coordination with extractant molecules. This work was supported by the RBPCH project from the Nuclear Energy Division of CEA with partial financial support from the