The most important problem in boric acid production from colemanite ores with H2SO4 is the formation of MgSO4 impurity due to the partial decomposition of clay minerals in the reaction media. Increase of MgSO4 concentration in solution may be balanced by the discharge of mother liquor which leads to decrease the efficiency of the process. Therefore, the intake rate of MgSO4 should be lowered for obtaining high purity product in a high yield process. In order to control the intake rate of MgSO4 impurity, propionic acid, which does not decompose the clay minerals, is used in an acid mixture with H2SO4. Batch wise laboratory experiments showed that the higher the propionic acid in reacting acid mixture, the lower the magnesium intake rate. When 10% of required H2SO4 replaced by propionic acid, magnesium intake concentration decreased to approximately half of the value obtained in the reaction with H2SO4.Colemanite (Ca Reaction of colemanite with sulfuric acid leads to the formation of sparingly soluble gypsum (CaSO H Reactions of H Reactions of H Decomposition rates of clay minerals depend on the free acid concentration in the reaction media If another purification technique, such as ion exchange, is not used, the only way to balance the MgSO When colemanite ore containing 38% B During the reactions around 90 The experiments were carried out with two different samples of colemanite; one was pure mineral and the other was the concentrated ore A jacketed 1-l glass reactor was used and stirred at 400 In order to assure the similarity with industrial process, 10% H The conductivity versus consumed colemanite curves given in The amounts of consumed colemanite during experiments were determined from the continuously recorded conductivity values. The advance of reaction was also followed by chemical analysis. Solution samples for the chemical analysis were taken at 5, 10, 20, 30, 60 and 120th   Soluble CaO concentration is another important parameter, which helps to understand the effect of propionic acid on the precipitated gypsum during the reaction. The solubility of gypsum should be depressed by the formation of highly soluble calcium propionate. This solubility depression was checked by comparing soluble CaO concentrations obtained from chemical analyses with calculated concentrations. In calculations, it was assumed that the solubility of gypsum remains unchanged in the presence of calcium propionate and the solution is not supersaturated with respect to gypsum ( Soluble magnesium ion concentrations (expressed as MgO %) determined during the reaction of concentrated colemanite with different acid mixtures are given in The concentration of soluble magnesium salts, expressed as MgO, in the reaction with pure sulfuric acid was found as 0.062%. It decreases to approximately half of this value when only 10% of required H In a previous work In the boric acid production process from colemanite ore, the use of propionic acid was proposed to control the intake rate of soluble impurities resulting from decomposition of clay minerals by H