The bioleaching of a concentrate produced from a black shale ore in an industrial operation in Poland was assessed. Following preliminary batch culture tests, processing in continuous conditions was tested to determine the main specifications for the application of the stirred-tank technology to this organic-rich polymetallic concentrate.
                  The experimental work was carried out in a laboratory-scale unit consisting of three stirred tanks (50 L or 20 L) using an acidophilic and moderate thermophilic (42 °C) bacterial population. Different configurations of the unit and key operating parameters were tested (nutrient medium composition, solids concentration, agitation and aeration rates). The analysis of both bacterial community structure and mineralogical characteristics of the concentrate and the bioleach residues were implemented in order to better understand the chemical and biochemical reactions occurring in the system. Using the data produced during the continuous operation, downstream processing assessment for both copper and silver recovery was also carried out.
                  The best copper recovery obtained in the continuous operation was 92% and hot brine leaching of the bioleaching residue (PLINT Process) permitted the recovery of 92% of the silver. Copper and silver recoveries seemed to be limited by incomplete chalcopyrite dissolution. A preliminary techno-economical evaluation of the concentrate bioleach processing, including bioleaching and copper and silver recoveries, demonstrated the potential economical feasibility. Silver recovery plays an important role in the process's finances. This study presents promising results that encourage further investigation of bioleach processing.European black shale ore deposits, in particular the Kupferschiefer, contain considerable reserves of basic and highly valuable rare and precious metals (including Cu, Ni, Zn, Pb, Ag, Au, Pt, and Pd) of which Europe is the main consumer. The black shale ores are typically polymetallic ores with a variable proportion of sulphidic components and an organic carbon content that exceeds at least 0.5%. The metal-bearing compounds are dispersed as small-size particles and the valuable metals may be trapped in organic matter in the ore or in slimes. Two major difficulties restrict the exploitation of the black shale ores. The first is the low efficiency of the conventional technical means for recovering valuable metals, from mining extraction to metallurgical processing. The second is the environmental impact of the application of conventional techniques ( Thanks to the extensive research carried out during the last 30 years, the potential of bio-oxidation and bioleaching processes is well recognized. The treatment of some minerals (sulphides, oxides) and the recovery of metals such as copper, gold and cobalt through bio-hydrometallurgical technologies are now well established ( In the frame of Bioshale, one of the case studies involved a carbonate-rich copper concentrate produced from a black shale ore in an industrial concentrator located in Poland. This concentrate was a polymineral (copper sulphides are mainly bornite, chalcocite and chalcopyrite) and polymetallic (Cu, Ag) resource. Bioleaching of the concentrate after non-oxidative acid pre-treatment for carbonate decomposition was selected as an interesting bioprocess option ( The technical objective of the work was to determine the main specifications for the application of stirred-tank technology to the Polish concentrate. This paper more specifically reports the continuous bioleach testing in a laboratory-scale unit carried out after preliminary batch tests. The following conditions were investigated: solid concentration in the feed, unit configuration (number and size of the reactors), nutrient medium composition and agitation–aeration rates. Another objective of the work was to better understand the chemical and biochemical reactions occurring in the system. Therefore, bacterial population composition and mineralogical modifications were specifically monitored during the tests. The data collected during this experimental test-work, combined with information concerning downstream processing for both copper and silver recovery, were finally used to establish a preliminary techno-economical evaluation of the process. The culture used in this study originated from a mixture of two consortia cultured for many years on both a cobaltiferous pyrite and a copper concentrate ( The structure of the bioleaching population was investigated in the inoculum used to start the continuous operation and during the campaign, when the unit (3 The sulphide material was a copper concentrate originating from a black shale ore and produced by a Polish concentrator. The main characteristics of the sample were as follows: Cu 16.1%, Ag 1010 mg/kg, Fe 7.1%, sulphur as sulphide 11.5%, Cmin 2.1%, Corg 8.2%, particle size (cumulative passing 80%) 40 µm. Copper sulphides composition of this material was determined by mineralogical analysis. In order to quantitatively determine the different proportions of each mineral phase in the concentrate and in the bioleach residues, the following protocol was used. Bromoform (density 2.8) densimetric separation was performed to separate heavy minerals from barren minerals and organic matter. Then, the concentrate of heavy minerals was compacted at high pressure using an anvil and the “compact disk” resulting from the process was polished. Finally, a CAMECA SX50 electron probe microanalyser (EPMA) equipped with 5 spectrometers (WDS technique) was used to determine the proportions of each mineral phase in a similar way as the counting point technique. The basic nutrient medium was the 0Km medium ( Batch experiments at 10% solids were carried out in 2 L laboratory-scale glass reactors thermostated at 42 °C. Air (120 L h The continuous bioleaching operation was carried out in a laboratory-scale unit equipped with 3 stirred reactors (R1, R2, R3). Two configurations were tested: three tanks, one of 50 L (R1) followed by two of 20 L operating capacity (R2, R3), three tanks, all of 20 L operating capacity (R1, R2 and R3). The tanks were all made from 304-L stainless-steel and had a height/diameter ratio equal to 1. The reactors were arranged in cascade so that the pulp passes from one tank to the next one by overflowing. Air enriched with CO The feed was made up of a high density pulp of concentrate (30% w/w in water) and a concentrated nutrient medium. The two feed flows were pumped separately into the first tank in a ratio corresponding to the solids ratio required for the feeding pulp. The culture temperature was maintained constant at 42 °C by circulating cold water through an internal stainless-steel coil for cooling and by an external electric ribbon for heating. In the first tank, the pH was regulated around 1.5 by adding H For the batch and continuous experiments, electrochemical potential and pH were measured directly in the pulp. Copper and total iron concentrations were measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Varian SpectrAA-300) in the supernatant fraction from 0.45 µm filtered culture samples. When the continuous unit was operating at a steady state, samples were collected from the overflowing pulp at the exit of the reactors and from the initial pulp feed. Samples of pulp were first filtered with a Büchner funnel. The filtered solid material was then rinsed with a sulphuric acid solution at pH 1.5 and dried. Copper, iron and other chemical elements contained in the solid and liquid phases were analysed by atomic absorption. A preliminary techno-economic evaluation of the concentrate bioprocessing including bioleaching, copper recovery by means of hydrometallurgical route and silver recovery from the bioleach residue was established. Main information was taken from research activities performed on concentrate bioleaching and downstream treatment on liquors and bioleach residue. Data from the literature on conventional technologies such as EW and SX were also used. When treated in batch, a non-oxidative acid treatment (170 g H In continuous mode, it was decided to combine acidification and bioleaching in the first stage of the unit. The bacterial culture and the bioleaching performances stabilised very quickly. Copper dissolution ( The solids concentration was then increased to 15% in order to be closer to industrial practices and to create more economically favourable conditions. A new unit configuration, with a smaller volume (3 The next objective of the study was to test some key operating parameters. A global dilution of the nutrient medium by a factor 3 was tested. This modification did not influence the overall efficiency of copper dissolution (results not shown). The limitation of the bioleaching efficiency to 90% was suspected to be due to a limited dissolution of chalcopyrite. Lowering the redox potential is known to favour chalcopyrite dissolution ( The predominant organisms in the Bioshale-BRGM culture used to inoculate the continuous unit, in terms of relative ratios, were: After 15 days of continuous operation (configuration 2a, Mineralogical analyses were performed to evaluate the modal composition of the concentrate and of the residues obtained in all reactors at the end of the continuous operation (configuration 2b, In the concentrate, silver minerals were not very abundant and silver (1010 mg/kg) was more often present as a trace element within Cu-bearing sulphide grains. At the end of the bioleaching process, less than 1% of the silver was measured in solution. Acanthite (Ag After optimising the experimental conditions of the PLINT Process with hot brine leaching ( The nominal capacity covered by the study is 500,000 t/y of feed material for a plant operating at full capacity on a continuous basis, totalling ca. 8000 operating hours per year. It corresponds to a production of approximately 75,000 t/y of pure copper and 1300 t/y of silver cement. A block diagram presents a simplified flowsheet of the plant ( The economic analysis of the concentrate bioprocessing ( The main objective of this work was to evaluate the technical and economical feasibility of the bioprocessing of a Polish organic-rich polymetallic concentrate. Copper recovery from chalcopyrite and silver recovery from bioleached residue were both investigated. The selected process option consisted of combining the bioleaching of the concentrate with a non-oxidative acid treatment for carbonate decomposition. The bioleachability of the concentrate was first assessed in batch tests. 95 to 97% copper recovery was obtained. The technical feasibility of the continuous treatment in stirred reactors was then demonstrated by running a laboratory-scale operation with 10% solids (91% Cu recovery after 6.5 days). No particular problem was raised by the presence of organic matter in the concentrate. This first interesting result underlined the possibility of applying stirred-tank bioleaching technology to a new type of resource: organic-rich concentrates originating from black shale ores. Copper (Ag, Pb, and Zn) Kupferschiefer type of ore is probably one of the major resources worldwide, particularly in central Africa, Asia and Central Europe (I. Salpeteur, personal communication). The main specifications for a potential industrial application of this stirred-tank technology to the concentrate were determined from the 10% solids conditions. These specifications were then used for the preliminary economic evaluation of the process. The solids concentration feed was increased to 15% and some parameters of the process were studied (number and size of the reactors, concentration of the nutrient medium, conditions of agitation and aeration). The increase in the solids concentration from 10 to 15% demonstrated the possibility to bioleach the same concentrate feed rate in the same residence time but in a smaller unit (90% Cu recovery after 6.5 days in 60 L instead of 90 L). These new operating conditions also enabled a better oxidation distribution towards the bioleaching unit. A global dilution of the medium by a factor of three was then tested. Even if it is difficult to estimate the exact nitrogen requirements ( The final copper recovery was limited due to an incomplete chalcopyrite oxidation. Chalcopyrite represents 20% of the concentrate's copper sulphides, i.e. 12% of the resource's initial copper content. A possibility to improve copper recovery would be to fine mill the concentrate to a particle size of at least 20 µm, which has previously been shown to be efficient. Nevertheless, because of economic considerations i.e. high increase in milling costs, this option was not considered. On the other hand, there is a consensus that says that the reduction of chalcopyrite leaching kinetics is due to the formation of a hindering phase or ‘passivation’ film, which builds up on its surface. However, there is still a debate concerning the nature of this film. Four candidates are most often proposed: metal deficient sulphides, elemental sulphur, polysulphides and jarosites ( As a consequence, it was decided in this work to decrease agitation/aeration rates in the two last reactors in order to meet adequate electrochemical potential conditions (Eh decreased to 380 mV in R2 and 410 mV in R3). The conditions in the first reactor were not changed in order to maintain a high oxidation rate of the other copper sulphides and a good bacterial growth. By decreasing agitation/aeration rates in the following reactors, oxygen transfer was reduced and bacterial iron oxidation efficiency became limited. The Fe(III)/Fe(II) ratio was modified thereby lowering the electrochemical potential. However, there was only a very slight improvement of Cu dissolution. It reached 92% recovery in a 6.6 days residence time instead of 90% in 6.5 days in the previous operating conditions (configuration 2a, To better understand the chemical and biochemical reactions occurring at each step of the process, some complementary mineralogical analysis was undertaken. The correlation of ore mineralogy, reaction chemistry and leach residue mineralogy is quite innovative as few results have been reported in the public domain ( The decrease in electrochemical potential in the last two reactors was clearly not an efficient means of improving chalcopyrite dissolution. ‘Passivation’ might already have occurred in the first reactor where the potential remained high (around 580 mV). A potential process improvement could be to combine a first step with a controlled potential to a second step with a high potential. It is also important to remember that no limitation of the copper recovery was observed in batch mode. The reasons for the discrepancy in performances between batch and continuous bioleaching mode remain to be determined. The bioleach residue also contained silver, mainly in the form of acanthite (Ag The initial presence of silver in the Polish concentrate (1010 mg/kg) could potentially represent favourable conditions for chalcopyrite dissolution. It has been reported that silver content above 300 mg/kg ( The second approach used to better understand the process was the bacterial community's structure. This showed that the microorganisms found in the process were acidophiles commonly found in bioleaching systems ( A preliminary techno-economic evaluation of the concentrate processing, including bioleaching and copper and silver recovery, was established based both on experimental data collected during the experimental campaigns and the literature. The recovery of 92% copper and silver was also considered. Copper recovery seems to be limited by the incomplete dissolution of chalcopyrite which could also limit silver recovery. The PLINT Process is perhaps more efficient for recovering silver from acanthite than from Cu-bearing sulphides. With these performances, the engineering study demonstrated the potential economic feasibility of the process. Both OPEX and CAPEX were within the range of other existing processes. Bioshale's proposed process OPEX is 0.31 €/lb Cu (i.e. around US$ 0.38/lb Cu). This is higher than the operating costs for in-place and dump leaching (US$ 0.18–0.22/lb Cu) but in the range of the operating costs for heap leaching (US$ 0.34–0.60/lb Cu ( Comparison with other technologies should also be interpreted carefully as the available data are very diverse in terms of concentrate specificities (mineral and metal composition) or unit treatment capacity for example. The present study has been conducted for a plant capacity of 500,000 t/y concentrate. This capacity was chosen to be equal to the actual industrial smelter capacity. However, this represents a greater capacity than that of current bioleaching installations. For example, the BIOX operations treat gold concentrate flowrates between 13,000 and 320,000 t/y ( Finally, this preliminary techno-economic study opens the possibility of studying the bioleaching of the Polish concentrate in CSTR in greater depth. Some technical improvements of the process could still be expected and could consequently improve the process's economy. The latter is well impacted by the silver recovery from the bioleach residue. The importance of this part of the process was clearly emphasised. This work was carried out in the frame of Bioshale (European project contract NMP2-CT-2004-505710). The authors acknowledge the financial support given to this project by the European Commission under the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development. This paper is published with the permission of BRGM as scientific contribution No. 5860. The authors would also like to thank KGHM Polska Miedź S.A. and KGHM Cuprum who provided the samples of organic-rich polymetallic concentrate and Laurence Poirier (BRGM) and Antoine De Las Heras (BRGM) for their technical support.