Technological advances and improved understanding of functional anatomy about the elbow have lead an evolution regarding operative reconstruction of complex proximal ulnar and coronoid fractures. When treating these complex and challenging fractures, goals of anatomic articular restoration along with balanced soft tissue stability can lead to early range of motion and thus, desired functional outcome. The purpose of this review is to outline and provide tips and pearls to achieve desired results, with a comprehensive update on the most recent literature to support the latest fixation methods and techniques.More than a simple hinge joint, the elbow represents a complex marriage between its bony foundation and surrounding soft tissue to provide an essential component to everyday, upper extremity functional anatomy. Underestimating the importance of elbow mobility and the relationship between the soft tissue and bony anatomy in the face of complex reconstruction can lead to severe functional limitations and have a devastating impact on activities of daily living. Recent advances in technology and studies have significantly improved our understanding of the elbow’s complex anatomy Achieving restoration of the articular surface with balanced reconstruction of the injured bony and soft tissue elements requires intimate knowledge of essential anatomy. The elbow is more than a simple hinge joint. The osseous foundation consists of three joints: the proximal radioulnar, the radiocapitellar, and the ulnohumeral (trochlear) joints. Elbow stability is obtained via a complex relationship between the aforementioned bony elements with its surrounding soft tissue. While the radiocapitellar joint acts as a secondary stabilizer to valgus load and posterolateral rotatory motion, the ulnohumeral joint remains the primary stabilizer of the elbow The coronoid process acts as an important buttress as it physically prevents the ulna from translating posteriorly on the humerus. Inherently, it acts as a counter to the pull of the triceps, the biceps, the brachialis, and the brachioradialis, which pulls the humerus anteriorly on the ulna. Arguably more important is the coronoid’s role as an anchor to both the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) and to the anterior band of the medial ulnar collateral ligament (MUCL), two essential components of balanced elbow stability Circumstances of urgency set aside (neurovascular compromise, open injury, etc.), physical examination in the immediate acute period following injury often is less than fruitful. Aside from extremity swelling and ecchymosis, very few reliable clinical exam findings, such as range of motion and stability, are often elicited in the emergency room. Even with higher energy injuries, where gross instability, deformity, and obvious loss of the extensor mechanism can be readily determined, no physical exam can rival the one performed in the operating room under anesthesia. While the patient is adequately sedated, a true test of ligamentous stability can be determined and can alter surgical planning. Furthermore, it is important to examine the contralateral extremity for any baseline deficits in range of motion or other deformities that may alter one’s operative plan. Regardless, a thorough clinical exam, including a comprehensive secondary exam, can give important clues to the fracture pattern that lies underneath. Standard radiographic examination of the elbow should include a minimum of three views: an anteroposterior (AP), an oblique, and a lateral. Additionally, contralateral x-rays may prove especially valuable in the setting of distorted anatomy secondary to injury and should be obtained to aid in surgical planning. Radiographs performed in the coronal plane are important for assessment of the proximal ulna and preoperative planning. Anatomic morphometric studies noted a natural varus angulation of approximately 14° in regards to the olecranon in relation to the ulnar shaft It is important to note that a perfect lateral radiograph is essential in performing a proper assessment of injury. A perfect lateral X-ray can allow for assessment of signs of instability that can be missed on a poorly performed radiograph. Subtle subluxation of the radial head can be found on the lateral X-ray in relationship to the capitellum Despite the breadth of information that can be attained from plain radiographic imaging, in the age of advancing technology, there should be a low threshold to obtain a computed tomographic (CT) exam. With imaging modalities becoming more sophisticated, CT with subsequent two-dimensional reconstructions can be supremely helpful in surgical planning. Finally, a recent study noted the improved reliability and agreement of three-dimensional CT reconstructions in coronoid fracture classification when compared to standard CT offering another tool to aid in elbow restoration Similar to other periarticular surfaces in the human body, proximal ulna and coronoid fractures are also described by a variety of classification schemes With respect to coronoid fractures, the Regan and Morrey Classification is classically and widely cited Definitive fixation of proximal ulnar and coronoid fractures revolves around three key principles: restoration of the articular surface, establishing elbow stability, and allowing early range of motion of the elbow with a competent extensor mechanism. However, as we alluded to in the previous section, the first step is proper identification of the injury. While simple olecranon fractures are most commonly caused by low energy falls from standing height, more complex proximal ulna fractures have a wider array of mechanisms, each of which portends its own unique characteristics ( When complex proximal ulna fractures occur with concomitant elbow dislocation, recognizing the pattern of dislocation is critical. Anterior (trans-olecranon) elbow dislocations are characterized by a complex disruption of the ulno-humeral articulation and an intact proximal radioulnar joint Surgical fixation of proximal ulna fractures revolves around stable anatomical restoration of the trochlear notch These fractures are best approached through a midline longitudinal dorsal incision. Attention is first turned to restoration of the normal ulnohumeral articulation and reconstruction of normal anatomic dimensions of the greater sigmoid notch. Standard instruments to have readily available in addition to plating options, including Kirschner wires (K-wires), and mini-fragment screws which can all help to achieve more facile reconstruction ( While tension band wiring is often the treatment of choice in simple olecranon fractures, it is not recommended for complex ulna fractures Locking compression plates have recently been adapted for the treatment of complex proximal ulna fractures. These pre-countoured plates combine the interfragmentary compression achieved in dynamic compression plates with the axial and rotational stability supplied by a locking construct while accounting for the radial bow. Given the proximity to the sigmoid notch, unicortical, fixed angle fixation available with locking plates becomes essential in the proximal portion of the ulna. Furthermore, unicortical screw fixation will not interfere with placement of an axial intramedullary screw, if desired, while maintaining construct stability In a situation of salvage, particularly in low-demand patients, olecranon excision and triceps advancement can be considered The surgical approach to the coronoid must be planned with respect to the concomitant bony and capsulo-ligamentous injuries that often occur simultaneously. The coronoid may be approached medially or through existing radial head or olecranon fractures. A single posterior midline incision can be used to access nearly the entire joint, and is particularly useful with other bony injuries. Alternatively, separate medial and lateral incisions may be made to approach the entire elbow, however a dorsal incision may also be required if dorsal-to-volar coronoid fixation is required. With a concomitant olecranon fracture, the dorsal incision should be preferentially utilized due to ease of access to the coronoid through the olecranon fracture site. For exposure of the anteromedial facet of the coronoid, a full thickness medial skin flap can be developed from a posterior midline incision, or a separate medial skin incision is utilized. The ulnar nerve is identified and decompressed from the arcade of Struthers through the flexor carpi ulnaris aponeurosis. Anterior subcutaneous transposition is optional. Multiple deep intervals may be utilized from the medial side. Small coronoid fractures anterior to the sublime tubercle are often best accessed via an “over-the-top” exposure as described by Hotchkiss It is evident that the coronoid is a critical structure for elbow stability Pollock et al. examined elbow stability in the setting of anteromedial facet fractures (O’Driscoll Type II) with and without LCL deficiency The results from these studies suggest that small coronoid fractures (Regan and Morrey Type I), particularly those that do not include capsular attachments, do not need to be repaired. Beingessner et al. showed that there was a slight increase in valgus angulation in the presence of a type I coronoid that was not corrected with suture fixation If fixation of small coronoid fractures is undertaken, they are best repaired with suture fixation While Type I fracture may require operative fixation to enhance stability, the majority of coronoid fractures are type II fractures and are ideally repaired with buttress plating Coronoid fractures rarely occur in isolation and are frequently one part of a complex osseous-capsulo-ligamentous injury of the elbow The final component of achieving sound stability is to address any injury to radial head. The radial head has been shown to be an independent restraint to posterior dislocation and injury to the radial head is commonly encountered in conjunction with coronoid fractures Splint or cast immobilization for up to four weeks may be required in cases where bone quality was poor or fixation was unstable In summary, definitive fixation of complex proximal ulna and coronoid fractures can be challenging, but have we gotten better? With specific goals for reconstruction, a better understanding of the surrounding anatomy and improved fixation techniques, improvements in outcome have occurred and supported by the literature. In addition to anatomic restoration of the articular surface, restoration of elbow stability is of paramount importance while utilizing a fixation construct that allows for confident early ROM. While we have improved our outcomes significantly over the past decade, there is much room for improvement. Future research should focus on strategies to improve and maintain ROM with decreased stiffness, which should maximize outcomes even further. None.