This study presents bioleaching of metals from a vanadium-rich oil-fired ash (OFA) sample using adapted Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. OFA is a major by-product of thermal power plants that contains metals such as V, Ni and Cu. The adaptation of bacteria to the ash sample was carried up to 4% (w/v), then three factors affecting metals recovery including initial pH, initial Fe2+ concentration and inoculum percentage were selected to be optimized. Initial pH of 1, inoculum of 1% and initial Fe2+ concentration of 1g/l were determined as optimal condition. Under optimum condition after 10days the maximum recovery for V, Ni and Cu was obtained 82%, 86%, and 87%, respectively. Results showed that in comparison with chemical leaching, bioleaching recovery of V, Ni and Cu were improved 20%, 16% and 8%, respectively. To determine the rate limiting step of the process, modified shrinking core model was used and result showed that diffusion step controlled the overall dissolution. The morphology and crystallinity of the samples before and after bioleaching were investigated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), respectively. Risk assessments of OFA before and after bioleaching by the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) were done and results indicated the bioleaching process detoxified OFA and the bioleached residue was well within the regulatory limits.Reinforcement of environmental regulations for dust and water pollution with metals by minimization of waste disposal and recovery of metal species from waste materials produced by industry have been extensively studied ( Vanadium is one of the important metals in the industry. Vanadium pentoxide is a vanadium compound that is mainly used in the steel industry for its physical properties of hardness, tensile strength, and fatigue resistance ( Various processes for the extraction of V from OFA have been reported. Classic chemical technology includes alkali melting and roasting, oxidation, chloridizing, water leaching and deposition ( In place of traditional extraction methods, it is possible to use bioleaching to recover valuable metals from solid waste. Bioleaching has the advantage of simplicity, low energy input, low capital cost, mild operating conditions, does not require specialized labor and is environmentally friendly ( According to the previous studies, optimization of different parameters such as initial Fe Slow kinetics and long operation times are disadvantages of bioleaching. To improve the efficiency of the process, it is necessary to determine the predominant parameters using kinetics ( A literature survey shows the bioleaching of oil fired ash has not been studied completely yet, so the biological knowledge for this waste is unknown and there are some gaps in this field. To know and control of the process, study of the key parameters in the different ranges for the bioleaching is necessary. The present study recovered V, Ni and Cu from thermo power plant ash using an adapted Oil fired ash was obtained from the Shahid Salimi Power Plant in Mazandran, Iran. The ash sample was ground and sieved to less than 75 A pure strain of pH was monitored using a portable pH meter (Metrohm, Swiss) while the Eh was measured using a portable Eh meter (Metrohm, Swiss) with a platinum electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Fe At the end of the experiments, the solution was filtered through Whatman no. 42 filter paper to separate the solids from the liquid. An inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) (Vista-pro, Australia) was used following standard procedures to analyze the metals after bioleaching. The leaching yield of the desired element was calculated based on the elemental content of the feed and the leach liquor as follows: Prior to the bioleaching experiments, the bacterial strain was acclimatized to OFA in a prolonged adaptation period to increase the tolerance of the cells culture to OFA toxicity. To determine the maximum tolerance of the bacteria, the OFA concentration was increased step-wise in a serial sub-culturing process ( In this research with attention to previous works, initial pH, inoculum percentage and initial Fe The effect of initial pH was the influential factor for extraction of metals ( The Fe The most efficient change for percentage of inoculum was 1% to 10%. The culture with at high inoculum percentage is not acceptable from an economical view. On the other hand low amount of inoculum percentage results in decrease the number of bacteria and consequently a decreasing in the bioleaching efficiency will be occurred. So it is necessary to study effect of inoculum percentage to find an optimum amount of this factor in bioleaching processes. The Fe The reaction kinetics has been studied according to the differential method of analysis that deals directly with the differential rate equation to be tested. It evaluates the derivative d(concentration)/d(time), and tests the goodness of the fit of equation with experiments. The rate of reaction can be shown according to the given formula ( Plotting straight line of TCLP was conducted to simulate material sitting inside a landfill for a number of years with an assumption of the acidic conditions found in most landfills, and then determine the mobility of both organic and inorganic analyses present in liquid, solid and multiphasic wastes from the leachate that materials would produce. TCLP leaching procedure tests were done based on USEPA methods 1312 (1990). Sample leached with an acetic acid solution at a 1:20 mix of sample to solvent which were amount of 100 Chemical leaching of the sample was carried out using H Adaptation of the cells culture was done in different steps. Adaptation during this step was continued to the addition of 1 The effect of initial pH was tested at values of 1, 1.5, 2 and 2.5 for 7 V, Ni and Cu have fast dissolution rates in the strongly acidic pH range ( The effect of percentage of inoculum was studied at 1%, 4%, 7% and 10% for 7 The abiotic hydrolysis of ferric sulfate follows this reaction: Growth was accompanied by a decrease in pH and the number of bacteria was 10 Initial Fe   Chemical leaching and bioleaching were compared for the recovery of V, Ni and Cu under optimal conditions. The optimal conditions for bioleaching were pH  No study has been published on bioleaching of OFA, but the V extraction was similar to those from previous studies on bioleaching using spent catalysts and Linz–Donawits (LD) converters ( Conversion reaction order (n) and the kinetic constant (k) in the Eq. The bioleaching process has four sequential steps that was including 1) the diffusion of the attacking species from the bulk solution to the reactant; 2) the diffusion of the reactants through the solid; 3) chemical reaction; and 4) the transfer of the resultant species to the bulk solution. Due to the vigorous shaking condition in bioleaching process, first and last steps are not usually the rate determining steps ( In the following the rate controlling step for each valuable metal in the OFAs including V, Ni and Cu was determined. The comparison between correlations expressing diffusion and chemical reaction controlled regimes for bioleaching of vanadium in the both of the variation of ferric with time is taken into account and also variation of ferric with time is assumed negligible was showed in The two kinetic models for chemical reaction and diffusion-controlled mechanisms were plotted based on the variations in metals recovery. The results of both controlled mechanisms and the correlation coefficients of the lines for Ni bioleaching are shown in   Determination of the mineral content before and after bioleaching was carried out by XRD. In this study, the TCLP test result of OFA before and after bioleaching is presented in This study examined the biological extraction of metals from OFA using This research was supported by