Objective
                  To determine whether radiographic findings associated with thoracolumbar burst fractures could be predictors of failure of short-segment posterior instrumentation with insertion screw at the fracture level (SSPI-f).
               
                  Methods
                  Seventy-five patients with thoracolumbar burst fracture surgically treated by SSPI-f were enrolled in the study and divided into 2 groups: a reduction group (n = 46) and a failed-reduction group (n = 29). Radiographic data including local kyphosis, Cobb angle, anterior vertebral height, posterior vertebral height (PVH), anterior/posterior vertebral height ratio, interpedicle distance (IPD), bony compress area, bony fracture area, and compress-fracture area of the fractured vertebra and clinical data including age and neurologic function were also analyzed. t test, Pearson χ2 test, and binary logistic regression were performed to compare the values.
               
                  Results
                  The PVH in the failed-reduction group was smaller than that of the reduction group (83.5% ± 7.2% and 89.1% ± 5.4%, respectively) (P = 0.001). The IPD differed between the reduction and failed-reduction group (18.0% ± 4.1% and 25.8% ± 7.1%, respectively) (P < 0.001). There was a statistical difference between the 2 groups in delayed time before surgery (P = 0.008). There was a significant difference of bony fracture area and compress-fracture area of the fractured vertebra between the failed-reduction and reduction group (both P < 0.001). Binary logistic regression showed that IPD was a risk factor of reduction failure of SSPI-f (P = 0.001).
               
                  Conclusions
                  These results showed that increased IPD was a risk factor of failed-reduction of SSPI-f in managing thoracolumbar burst fractures, particularly for patients with neurologic deficit, whereas local kyphosis, Cobb angle, anterior vertebral height, PVH, anterior/posterior vertebral height ratio, bony compress area, bony fracture area, and compress-fracture area of the fractured vertebra were not.In all spine fractures, thoracolumbar fractures occur frequently, accounting for about 90% of spinal fractures, of which thoracolumbar burst fracture is the main component. To some extent, management of thoracolumbar burst fractures, including conservative management and surgical intervention, is based on clinical and radiologic criteria. Mild compression fractures without any neurologic deficit could be conservatively treated with a brace or a cast. Several studies Therefore, we analyzed patients with thoracolumbar burst fractures who underwent short-segment posterior instrumentation with insertion screw in the fracture vertebra (SSPI-f) to determine whether characteristics of thoracolumbar burst fractures on plain radiography or CT could be predictors of failed reduction in SSPI-f. A total of 75 patients with thoracolumbar burst fractures who underwent SSPI-f by a senior spinal surgeon at our hospital from January 2014 to December 2015 were enrolled in the study. Fractures in the study were type A3 according to the AOSpine Thoracolumbar Spine Injury Classification System, After general anesthesia and general endotracheal tube intubation, the patients were placed in the prone position, and the abdomen was left unsupported by using cushions. Fluoroscopy was performed to identify the fracture segment before the operation proceeded. The skin of the middle was incised to expose the entry points of the pedicle screws of the fractured vertebra and the vertebra above and below the fractured vertebra through a Wiltse approach. Cortical bone was nibbled by a high-speed drill, and an awl was inserted to cannulate the pedicle. The tract was palpated with a probe to ensure that all of the pedicle walls were not disrupted; fluoroscopy was used to confirm the pedicle trajectory. Pedicle screws (length, 45–50 mm; and diameter, 6.5 mm) were inserted into the pedicles above and below the fractured vertebra with an appropriate length. Two pedicle screws were inserted into the fractured vertebra with a length of 30 mm or 35 mm and a diameter of 6.5 mm. Proper sized lordotic rods were used, ligamentotaxis reduction was performed once manipulative traction was applied along the lordotic rods with all pedicle screws in place, and height and kyphosis were restored with these maneuvers. Laminectomy was performed to depress the vertebral canal for intracanal fracture fragments for patients with neurologic deficit. The patients stayed in bed for 2 weeks, and 2 weeks later, a brace was advocated for each patient for 3 months. Thoracolumbar plain lateral and anteroposterior radiograph (Philips Digital Diagnost) and CT images (Philips Medical Systems, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) obtained in the supine position were measured at the preoperative stage. All parameter measurements were performed by using PACS (Picture Archiving and Communication System) with an accuracy of 0.01 mm and 0.01. On plain anteroposterior radiography of the fractured vertebra, the interpedicle distance (IPD) was measured following the method proposed by Willén et al., In the sagittal CT reconstruction images, the bony compressed area, bony fracture area, and compress-fracture area of the fractured vertebra were measured following the method proposed by Wu et al., Neurologic function was assessed from retrospective review of medical records including neurologic function on admission. The severity of neurologic deficit was assessed according to the American Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) scale. The thoracolumbar injury classification system score included fracture pattern (compression fracture, 1 point; burst, 1 point; translational/rotational fracture, 3 points; and distraction fracture, 4 points), neurologic status (intact, 0 point; root injury/spinal cord injury [complete], 2 points; spinal cord injury [incomplete]/cauda equina, 3 points); and posterior ligamentous complex injury (intact, 0 points; indeterminate injury, 2 points; and injury, 3 points). The data were analyzed using SPSS software version 19.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, New York, USA). A Student The patients' demographic data were summarized in There were 49 patients with successful reduction through SSPI-f, and 26 patients with failed reduction requiring additional anterior vertebra reconstruction instrumentation. We compared the preoperative values between the 2 groups ( In this study, the amount of spinal injury according to the ASIA scale was 4 in grade A, 28 in grade B, 19 in grade C, 16 in grade D, and 8 in grade E. There were 24 patients with neurologic deficit in the failed-reduction group graded as ASIA A in 2 patients, B in 12 patients, C in 7 patients, and D in 3 patients, accounting for 92% of all patients. The percentage of patients with neurologic deficit in the failed-reduction group was larger than that in the reduction group (88%). There was no significant difference ( Through binary logistic regression, the IPD (odds ratio, 1.4; 95% confidence interval, 1.1–1.7, In the study, the increased IPD of the fractured vertebra was a risk factor of failed reduction by SSPI-f in the treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures. About 50% of thoracic and lumbar fractures occurred in the thoracolumbar junction of the spine (T11-L2), which was subjected to biomechanical stress. Thoracolumbar burst fracture was characterized by middle column injury with retropulsed fracture fragments. Limitations of the study included the sample size, which was not large enough, placing bias on the stability of the results. There were a relatively high number of neurologically deficit patients in the study, and the patients in the study were managed by single senior spine surgery from a single hospital. A multicenter prospective randomized study with a large sample is required to confirm whether the factors mentioned in the study are associated with reduction efficiency. Furthermore, reproducibility of measurement and a statistically determined value of IPD in the study could not be addressed, and correlation between radiologic and further clinical results cannot be determined without further follow-up. Our data proved useful in a preliminary assessment of reduction efficiency of SSPI-f based on radiographic images. These results show that increased IPD improves risk of reduction failure of SSPI-f in managing thoracolumbar burst fractures, particularly for patients with neurologic deficit, whereas delayed time before surgery, LK, CA, AVH, PVH, A/P, bony compressed area, bony-fractured area, and compress-fracture area do not. 