A new mathematical model was developed for leaching of zinc ores containing silicates such as hemimorphite which produce a gel during leaching with sulfuric acid. This model is based on the shrinking core model in which the particle size and the reacting core shrink simultaneously. It was shown that the actual dissolution time of the ore particles is longer than the time corresponding to the dissolution of chemical zinc oxide itself. It was suggested that because of the existence of silicates in the ore, a gelatinous layer was formed around the reacting core. Since the gel product is soft, it breaks apart when the particles collide and as a result, the particles shrink. However, a thin gelatinous layer always covers the reacting core which increases the mass transfer resistance and increases the leaching time. This model was applied to leaching of a zinc-rich tailing containing hemimorphite and the thickness of the gelatinous layer as well as the diffusion coefficient in this layer was determined.The main source of zinc metal production is zinc sulfide ore. Currently, depletion of these sulfide ores has brought more emphasis on zinc extraction from oxides, silicates or even secondary sources. Zinc extraction is performed mainly by hydrometallurgical methods. In the hydrometallurgical process, the ore is first leached by a solvent and then before electrowinning a purification process is used to prepare the solution for eletrolysis. During the leaching process of zinc oxidized ore, soluble zinc sulfate forms which stays in solution. In this process, the lead compounds form lead sulfate precipitates which transfer to the leaching filter cake during the solid/liquid separation. Leaching of the ore at pH ca. 2, transforms the silicate compounds of the ore to colloidal silica, i.e., a gel ( Process kinetics and optimum operating conditions have been studied for the leaching of zinc silicate ore tailings. Some researchers have reported the possible existence of internal diffusion resistance. For instance, Based on the above evidences, it can be concluded that when a core shrinks, an internal resistance layer, either a reaction product layer or a gel film forms around the core and results in a decrease in the extraction yield in the leaching process. However, in many cases, the size of the particle (including unreacted core and the layer) decreases with time. In other words, although the product layer forms around the core, it shrinks as the core shrinks. In all the previous studies, existence of this gelatinous layer around the particle was neglected during the kinetics calculations and its effect on the kinetics of leaching was not taken into account. In the present study, a mathematical model has been developed based on the shrinking core model in which the resistance of the gelatinous product film is also considered. This kinetic model consists of three steps: external diffusion in the liquid, internal diffusion in the gelatinous product film and chemical reaction on the surface of the core. Zinc silicate ore, as hemimorphite, reacts with sulfuric acid according to the following reaction: Zinc sulfate is soluble in water. However, disilicic acid, Si The most common models considered in leaching are illustrated in The assumptions of the model are as follows: The particles are spherical. During the process, the particle shrinks uniformly, thus, it maintains its spherical shape. In the absence of adequate information, the thickness of the silica layer around the core was assumed to be constant during the leaching process. Although there exist many reactions in the leaching of zinc by sulfuric acid from the ore, for the sake of simplicity, the main reaction considered in this work is dissolution of zinc oxide in acid. In other words, the main source of zinc in the leaching was assumed to be zinc oxide. Hemimorphite particles were considered as the source of silica responsible for the gel formation. Other substances present in the ore do not have any significant effect on the kinetics. The temperature remains constant during the process. The particle and the gelatinous layer are both non-porous. Thus, mass transfer occurs through molecular/ion diffusion in these phases. Considering all the above assumptions, the first step for developing the model is to define a criterion indicative of the advancement of reaction versus time. The rate of reaction per unit surface of the core can be related to the dissolution rate of zinc oxide as follows: The rate of zinc oxide disappearance can be expressed as: It has been shown in several references that the rate of reaction for dissolution of zinc oxide, Therefore, the rate of shrinkage can be expressed as: The acid concentration, The boundary conditions are: Considering that the process is in quasi-steady-state conditions, the rate of reaction at the surface of the core would be equal to the rate of mass transfer to and through the gel film: Solving the differential Eq. Therefore, the dissolution rate of zinc oxide can be expressed as: Eq. Therefore, the final differential equation, from which the extent of dissolution of particles as a function of time can be obtained, can be then achieved by combining Eqs. The only chemical reaction considered in this work on the surface of the core is dissolution of zinc oxide by sulfuric acid. Reaction rate constant for dissolution of pure zinc oxide in sulfuric acid is calculated from the following equation ( It is worth mentioning that in all previous investigations on kinetics of leaching of zinc with sulfuric acid, different rate constants were reported (e.g., The mass transfer coefficient was calculated from ( Evaluation of mass transfer coefficient from Eq. Performance of the proposed model was examined using the experimental data reported by   There are three terms in the denominator of Eq. A mathematical model was developed for leaching of zinc from a zinc ore containing silica. It was shown that considering only the chemical reaction of zinc dissolution is not sufficient for estimating the leaching time of the ore. A thin gelatinous layer was considered to cover the reacting core of the ore in order to correct the model prediction. Adding the mass transfer resistance of this layer to the model considerably improved the predictions. It was shown that the thickness of the gel is almost constant but the diffusion coefficient of the gel decreases with temperature. At low temperatures, the reaction rate is significantly lower than the rate of mass transfer through this layer which alters the mechanism to diffusion controlled. At high temperatures, both chemical reaction and mass transfer control the dissolution rate of the zinc ore particles containing silica. The authors would like to thank Professor Fathi Habashi from the University of Laval, Canada, for his valuable comments during the work.