 Patients with potential wound healing issues such as diabetes, soft tissue trauma, or older age Weber C fractures in younger patients to avoid extensive dissection Patients with medial and posterior malleolar fractures that are amenable to percutaneous reduction and fixation  A fibula too tight to accept the nail Patients with involvement of the tibial plateau Failure to recognize poorly controlled diabetes, Charcot arthropathy, or vitamin D deficiency  Reduction and fixation of the syndesmosis remains a complex part of the procedure. Patients with a potential better result with a plate should undergo plate fixation. Comminution of the medial malleolus or posterior malleolus may mandate an open plate procedure.  Preoperatively the skin should be examined to determine if there is any blistering or an open wound ( Plain radiographs should be performed after closed reduction of the fracture ( A computed tomography (CT) scan is helpful in determining the position and displacement of the fracture fragments (  Closed reduction and casting Closed reduction and Kirschner wire (K-wire) fixation Open reduction and internal fixation with plates Closed reduction and external fixation  If the fracture extends above the level of the ankle, then the syndesmosis is likely unstable and requires fixation ( The medial side may be disrupted with a deltoid ligament injury or a medial malleolar fracture. Repair of the deltoid ligament or stabilization of the medial malleolar fracture may assist in the reduction of the fibula ( The syndesmosis is stabilized by the anterior tibiofibular ligament (ATFL) anteriorly between the Gerdy tubercle on the tibia and the fibula just above the ATFL. The syndesmosis is held posteriorly by the posterior tubercle on the tibia and a band going laterally onto the posterior aspect of the fibula.  The patient is positioned on the table with the foot at the level of the end of the table, and the ankle is slightly internally rotated using a bean bag ( Either a thigh tourniquet or a sterile calf tourniquet is used. The arthroscopy tower is placed on the opposite side of the bed to the surgical limb.  Ensure that the leg is internally rotated to the point that the fixation screws go in the correct direction between the fibula and the tibia. Access may also be required to the medial side and the posterior malleolus so the leg may need to be externally rotated to access the medial side or internally rotated to a lateral position so that the posterior malleolus can be accessed from behind the peroneal tendons and transfixed.  Failure to internally rotate the limb Use of a calf tourniquet may restrict the operative field and may stabilize an unstable syndesmosis  Medial and anterior lateral portal ( Occasionally a posterior portal may be required  Use palpation and the C-arm to determine the correct position of the portals. The screw insertion sites can be percutaneous: palpation and C-arm views will confirm the correct position for hardware insertion. A pelvic reduction clamp can be placed percutaneously and then used to “site” the starting and finishing point for a screw.  Malposition of the portals can restrict access and view of the joint. The portal can be remade in the correct position.  The 2.9-mm arthroscope works well for arthroscopic ankle fracture reduction, as it has a high flow cannula that can be used to remove blood from the joint. Gravity flow or a pump can be used for the inflow. However, high pressure should not be used as this may cause a compartment syndrome.  A portal can be made through a fracture site–for example, through a medial malleolar fracture if required. Posterior portals can be essential to view the joint but are difficult to establish. The ankle can be placed in a foot holder to allow posterior access, although this may create recurvatum at the fracture site. Alternatively the patient can be placed in a lateral position to allow posterior access. Another approach to access the posterior side of the joint is to place a sterile bandage around the ankle, tie this around the surgeons waist, and suspend the limb over the edge of the bed to allow access.  The arthroscope is inserted into the ankle and the joint flushed to remove any blood clots within the joint. The joint is assessed for fracture lines, ligament injury, capsular disruption, and cartilage injury ( Cartilage damage is débrided, as is capsular damage that may impinge in the joint after reduction ( The changes are noted to assist in fracture reduction and to assist in the postoperative care.  A high flow cannula and tourniquet will assist in cleaning blood clots out of the joint. Early arthroscopy and reduction is easier to perform as the fracture fragments are easier to reduce with traction. Elevation of the limb before tourniquet inflation will assist in removal of blood clots and make visualization easier.  Failure to reduce the fracture fragments Failure to visualize the joint  2.9-mm arthroscope with a high-flow cannula 3.5-mm shaver Gravity inflow  Arthroscopy has been reported to cause compartment syndrome after fracture. Arthroscopy may assist in the assessment of the joint, débridement of chondral defects, reduction of the joint line, and removal of potentially impinging soft tissues.  After the arthroscopic assessment, the fibular nail is placed so long as the fracture is appropriate for reduction. A starting point for the fibular nail is identified ( The distal fibula is approached using a guidewire placed percutaneously into the central aspect of the distal fibula and confirmed on C-arm view ( The entry site is then reamed up. A proximal awl is placed across the fracture site. The nail is placed, reducing the fibula in all aspects except possibly length and rotation.  Ensure that the starting point is correctly placed. The longest nail will give the best reduction with respect to flexion and extension, varus and valgus.  If the nail is too narrow at the isthmus, the fibula may break during nail insertion. The proximal fibula needs to be reamed up to match the proximal diameter of the nail.  Fibular nail system C-arm 2.9-mm arthroscope  The quality of reduction may be better or worse than plate fixation depending on the experience of the surgeon.  The syndesmosis may still be malreduced with respect to anterior and posterior translation, medial to lateral displacement, and rotation even if the fibula is anatomic. To reduce the fibula without incisions, the foot is dorsiflexed and the fibula correctly reduced on the lateral side of the talus with respect to length and rotation. Inspection of the lateral gutter arthroscopically will confirm the quality of reduction ( The initial reduction can be held with a percutaneous K-wire, followed by a syndesmosis screw.  A pelvic reduction forceps can be placed percutaneously to ensure closure of the syndesmosis. A small open arthrotomy and repair of the ATFL will allow correct reduction of the syndesmosis in all planes (length, translation) except for rotation. Compression of the posterior syndesmosis will correct this. Repair of the deltoid ligament if ruptured will assist in the reduction and stabilization of the syndesmosis.  The medial side must be stabilized before the syndesmosis reduction as this will control the medial translation.  The syndesmosis is closed using a pelvic reduction clamp. The syndesmosis screw should be long enough to engage both cortices to ensure that it can be removed from the medial side if there is a screw breakage and ongoing pain.  The indication for syndesmosis screw removal is not clear. Early removal may prevent breakage but may result in an unstable syndesmosis. Suture systems, deltoid ligament repair, ATFL repair, and posterior tibiofibular ligament (PTFL) repair may be preferable to a syndesmosis screw.  The medial malleolus may be amenable to percutaneous reduction and arthroscopic assessment ( The reduction can be performed using a percutaneous clamp and initial K-wire fixation ( The reduction can then be confirmed arthroscopically. In this illustration the reduction was not anatomic and was repeated ( Percutaneous fixation is then performed.  A percutaneous clamp can be used to hold and to derotate the distal fragment and then compress the fragments.  The medial malleolar fragment may be too small, too osteoporotic, or too comminuted to allow percutaneous reduction. In this case a small incision can be used to repair the deltoid ligament using sutures and removal of the bone fragments.  Full thread cannulated screws or full thread solid screws  It is not clear if the deltoid needs to be repaired in the absence of a fracture or if the fracture is small.  The posterior malleolar fracture not only may contribute to the congruency of the joint but is also the attachment of the PTFL. The indication for repair is not only restoration of the joint surface but also stabilization and reduction of the syndesmosis. The posterior malleolus can be approached in the prone position, the lateral position, or an internally rotated supine position, with the percutaneous approach being from just posterior and medial to the peroneal tendons. Fixation can be achieved using similar implants to the medial malleolus. A pelvic reduction forceps can assist in the reduction with two percutaneous incisions.  Make sure the patient is correctly positioned to ensure that the posterior malleolar fixation can be placed.  Failure to place the hardware in the correct position Failure to reduce the posterior malleolus  Pelvic reduction forceps Full thread cortical screws, headed, and cannulated or uncannulated  A soft tissue repair may be beneficial in the absence of fracture. The repair of posterior malleolar fractures to stabilize the syndesmosis may not have much outcome data to date.  Ligament repairs of the ATFL, the tibiofibular ligament, and the talofibular ligament may be required.  Depending on the stability of the fracture and compliance of the patient, the patient is kept non–weight bearing for 2 or 6 weeks. The patient is reviewed at 2 weeks for removal of sutures and a wound check. An x-ray is performed at 2 weeks if there is any concern. X-rays are otherwise performed at 6 and 12 weeks with gradual remobilization and weaning from the walker boot.  A CT scan can be performed within a week after surgery to assess reduction after a percutaneous procedure. Ensure that patients with diabetes maintain good sugar control (hemoglobin A1c < 8) to assist in bone and skin healing. Give all at risk patients vitamin D to assist in bone healing (50% of patients are deficient). Advise smokers to quit smoking to assist in wound healing.  Failure to recognize a wound issue Failure to recognize the development of a Charcot arthropathy  Compression stockings will assist in the reduction of swelling and improve outcome scores. A brace can be worn for more stable fractures after 6–8 weeks.  Some authors advocate early postoperative weight bearing, and others delay weight bearing to 6 weeks.