Reservoir permeability is a critical parameter for the evaluation of hydrocarbon reservoirs. There are a lot of well log data related with this parameter. In this study, permeability is predicted using them and a supervised committee machine neural network (SCMNN) which is combined of 30 estimators. Statistically speaking, the results of simple neural network are not proper, for permeability data have a large range and are multi-populations. Therefore, all of data were divided in two low and high permeability populations using statistical study. Each estimator of SCMNN was combined of two simple networks to predict permeability in both low and high classes and one gating network, considered as a classifier, classified data to these two classes. Thus, each low and/or high input data would predict in related network. This SCMNN was used to predict permeability on the data of one of petroleum reservoirs of south-west of Iran. 220 samples of this reservoir were available that 80% of them were used as training data and 20% of them were used as validation and testing data. The overall fitting between predicted permeability versus measured ones was qualified through R2 (R=correlation coefficient) to be 97.72% which is considered appropriate. Whereas, R2 in the simple network in the best stat was 84.14%. The high power and efficiency of SCMNN are indicated by lower bias and better R2 in results.Reservoir permeability is a critical parameter for the evaluation of hydrocarbon reservoirs ( Many empirical equations are available to transform well log data to permeability ( The statistical approach is comparatively a more versatile approach to the problem of permeability prediction. It makes use of the available core permeability (the dependent variable) and develops functional relationships with the well log data (the independent variables). It, however, requires the assumption and satisfaction of multi-normal behavior and linearity, and hence it must be applied with caution ( Besides statistical methods, neural networks, or more specifically, multilayer perceptions (MLP) have become increasingly popular in well log analysis. This intelligent technique is non-linear and non-parametric and has been applied to permeability prediction from well logs. Recent comparison studies ( A committee machine (CM), also called a committee machine neural network (CMNN), consists of a group of experts ( CM network has been shown to be more effective than a single network in terms of generalization performance ( Over than using an efficient way such as an empirical equation, a theoretical or statistical formula, and a MLP or CNN, one of the most important reasons which make results unreliable is the high range of permeability in each reservoir. In term of statistic, this wide range of data creates different populations, so applying just one rule cannot support all data properly. The main idea of this study is a supervisory attitude in use of committee machine neural network (SCMNN). Instead of applying one CMNN for all data, different networks are used for different statistical populations. A simple neural network is an artificial intelligence technology. It simulates the working of the human brain and nervous system. A multi-layered feed-forward neural network is a class of widely used model. It consists of an input layer, an output layer and at least a hidden one ( Each neuron in a hidden layer consists of two different operations acting by summation and activation functions. The neuron's input signal, Where The sigmoid function is one of the most common forms of activation function. This function performs a mapping from A back propagation neural network (BPNN) is by far the most popular multi-layered feed-forward neural network. BPNN uses the back propagation-learning algorithm to perform training. It assigns random weights to all interconnections between neurons initially, computes the error between desired target and network prediction and then propagates the error backward through the network. Thus by approximating the desired target value, the network iteratively adjusts these weights to find a best combination of weights to minimize the prediction error ( The basic BPNN uses the gradient steepest descent method to minimize the performance function for example MSE. Suppose that there are This kind of training algorithm is often too slow for practical problems ( There are several diagnostic tools used to evaluate the performance, such as the plot of MSE versus the epoch, scatter plot, coefficient of determination (R A committee machine (CM) consists of a group of experts ( As it was supposed in section (2–1), there are Where ξ[.] denotes the expectation. The average error for experts acting alone is: Alternatively, a CM is used to obtain a prediction by simply averaging the output vector Thus, the CM estimate has the prediction squared error: And it would demonstrate that the error of CM is lower-equal than the average error of In this study, obtained data from 3 cored wells (wells number 3, 6, and 8) of one of southwestern petroleum reservoir of Iran were used. Different well log data were surveyed in these wells that provided appropriate information. These raw data were processed and, therefore, more suitable data were produced. For selecting input parameters of neural network it was tried to choose some variables that are related to permeability and also existed in each 3 wells. Finally, these variables were selected: Spectral Gamma Ray ( As mentioned above, 10 variables, which are as: As for the number of neurons in the hidden layer, The only output of the network is also permeability that should be estimated. Thus, network architecture is configured as 10-23-1 for the three layer of BPNN. No matter how complex the relation between inputs and output is, a neural network still can learn it by proper training ( To make use of the early stopping method, data should be divided into three parts of training data, validation and test ( For the training of basic BPNN, the gradient steepest descent method is usually adopted to minimize the performance function (e.g. MSE) and the weights and biases are iteratively adjusted. This kind of training algorithm is generally too slow to converge for practical problems ( Finally, the above mentioned network was trained under 176 training data. Then it was tested by testing data. The obtained results of the test of this network have been illustrated in In By statistical studies, 3 different statistical populations were found in the primary data ( To make sure that these populations are apart from each other statistically, t-student test was used. The calculated value of this parameter for these two populations was obtained According to the above mentioned cases, to better solve the problem and to divide data to low and high permeability, it was decided to use supervised committee machine based on neural network (SCMNN). In this study, proposed SCMNN include 30 estimators. Each of them includes two simple neural networks and one gating network which this network is for classification of input data. Architecture of two simple networks is like last used network (10-23-1) in previous sections. One of these two networks is trained for low permeability by low permeability training data and the other one is trained for high permeability by high permeability training data. Gating network has the architecture like previous ones but it is trained by all training data ( According to the border between low and high permeability populations ( Where Then, there are two states of ( At first, a simple neural network (similar to section 3-3) was used for classification in a gating network. Therefore, according to the predicted value of input sample if it was lower than 3 A classifier neural network was used to solve this problem. Thus, previous neural network was considered as a classifier but this time with two Eventually, the general SCMNN was formed with 30 separate estimators that each of them was the same as One important note that is seen in the results explicitly is the existence of some low value for R The reason of this claim has been provided for 10-th network with the lowest R There are two conditions that may lead to wrong classification. In the first case, wrong classification of training data could lead the classifier to predict it as a wrong member. This error may happen in rare cases, because the training procedure is supervised by user based on statistical relations and the expert knowledge. This approach along the mentioned strategy should to a great extent guaranty the training's accuracy. The second case is related to the network itself. According to existing refereed literature, NNs are mostly act as some kind of interpolation methods which like other interpolators, they are not very heuristics in extrapolation. This condition may occur when the input data are close to lower or higher boundary values. Therefore, the wrong predicted results are inherent to most NNs application including the current study. Nevertheless, existence of a few wrong results (4 networks Therefore, though the other samples were predicted correctly and located on 45 degree line properly, this network can't be considered as a weak network. On the other hand, more supplementary data with high spatial extent could be considered as an alternative for reducing the risk of wrong classification. Thus, the more training data, the more accuracy will be resulted by NNs. On the other hand, according to the main idea of CMNN, the final predicted value for each input was obtained by the average of outputs of all 30 estimators. In this case the overall R The processing time could be crucial. Since the primary objective of this study was to achieve highly accurate results, most computations were performed regardless of the CPU time and usage. As mentioned, in this study only simple and committee machine (SCMNN) neural networks with 30 estimators each having 3 simple networks (low and high permeability networks and a classifier) were assessed. At the first look, it is expected that because of special structure of SCMNN which is composed of 30 Moreover, usually when a simple network is used to predict a parameter, it is better to run it several times and utilize the average of its results. In this study 30 times running of simple network was considered to produce an accurate prediction (which in order to have a reasonable comparison, the best result of them ( Generally neural networks are of the most powerful estimators. Nowadays, the use of this intelligence method has been extended significantly in respect of petroleum reservoirs. SCMNN that is a collection of some estimators such as neural network have been created to decrease both bias and prediction error and increase the efficiency of these networks in producing valid results. As observed in this study, a SCMNN can produce better results than a simple network. R This improvement in the results was done because of using different networks in different statistical populations. As we pointed, because of the wide range of permeability values, a simple neural network cannot cover this range properly while better results was obtained by statistical separation of primary data to two high and low permeability populations with border of 3 It should be mentioned that this study was done with cooperation of National Iranian South Oil Company (NISOC) that it behaves me to appreciate cooperation of Eng. Ataei and Eng. Kiani who helped us in execution of this study.