Iron-substituted strontium titanate Sr(Ti,Fe)O3 (STF) is a semiconducting oxygen sensing ceramic, and features a temperature independent conductivity at temperatures between 700 and 800°C for the composition SrTi0.65Fe0.35O3–δ
                      (STF35). Aerosol deposition (AD) offers advantages as a means of producing thick films of this sensor material. In this work, aerosol co-deposition of ceramics (AcDc) was used to tune the functional properties of STF35 by incorporating alumina particles directly. Composite films of STF35:Al2O3 with homogeneously distributed particle fractions were successfully deposited by AcDc. The conductivity of films was tunable over an order of magnitude with up to 60 volume percent alumina, and the temperature independent oxygen sensing behavior, as observed in bulk ceramics, was retained. Higher percentages of alumina decreased the conductivity further (up to four orders of magnitude) but the sensor response characteristic to oxygen disappeared.Iron substituted strontium titanate Sr(Ti,Fe)O The “Aerosol Deposition” (AD) method is a novel coating technique involving the “Room Temperature Impact Consolidation” (RTIC) mechanism to deposit dense ceramic films with thicknesses from sub-micron to several hundred microns AD of ceramic–metal and ceramic–polymer mixtures have been used to modify electrical properties like conductivity In this work, aerosol co-deposition of STF35:Al The objectives are two-fold: To investigate whether fine tuning of the electrical conductivity of STF35 is possible by AcDc with Al To investigate the deposition behavior during AcDc with different amounts of the hard alumina particles. SrTi Reagent grade alumina powder was milled and dried in the same way. Four STF35:Al Prior to deposition, all powders were sieved (mesh size 90 Both starting powders, Al Powders were examined by X-ray diffraction analysis (D8 Advance, Bruker, Billerica, MA, USA) at angles 2 Films were produced using a custom-made AD apparatus previously reported in Ref. Films on alumina were prepared for cross-sectional images and examined by SEM (Leo 1530 VP, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) using a backscatter electron detector and EDX. Screen printed electrode structures on alumina substrates were then used to measure resistance as a function of temperature at intervals of 100 The pure STF35 powder as well as all of the STF35:Al The large Z-contrast in back scattered electron imaging between STF35 (bright) and Al When increasing the alumina volume content of the powder to 40% (60:40 mixture), STF35 remained as the continuous phase. When the alumina content was raised further to 60%, a change in film morphology became apparent. Here STF35 and alumina built an interpenetrating network on the sub-micron range. For the 20:80 film, Al Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was utilized to quantify the composition at two different spots within the film sample. Deviation was lower than 2% for each measured sample. Weight percentages were converted to volume percentages using the theoretical densities. The composition within the film generally followed the composition of the powder. That is to say, the mixing ratio of powders was generally preserved during aerosol co-deposition. However, a slight change in the composition appears to have occurred near the extremes ( Other material properties (hardness, density) and particle characteristics (size, state of agglomeration) are known to influence the deposition  Comparing the conductivity values at 300  Such a dramatic change is indicative of percolation, for which the generalized effective media theory (GEMT) can be adopted The film with 25 volume percent STF35 (20:80) is near the percolation threshold of 24%, and therefore shows a high resistivity, dictated by the alumina matrix. The oxygen sensing characteristics after annealing are shown in  Higher alumina contents (40:60 sample) lead to an interpenetrating network of both material components without an obvious continuous phase. As a result, Aerosol co-deposition of ceramics (AcDc) was used to fabricate oxygen sensing STF35:Al All composite films up to 40 volume percent alumina exhibited an oxygen sensing characteristic similar to bulk STF35, with sensitivity of It was thus shown that AcDc has the ability to fine tune the electrical conductivity of sensors by creating a robust composite ceramic film with a controlled amount of passive filler. Funding of a Mercator Fellowship by the The authors are indebted to Mrs. Mergner for SEM imaging, to the chair of applied mechanics and fluid dynamics for particle size measurements (Prof. Nuri Aksel) and to the chair of metals and alloys (Prof. Uwe Glatzel) for XRD.