Photoelectrochemical method was adopted to investigate the photocatalytic oxidation of different organic compounds. It was found that at the anatase TiO2 nanoporous electrode, the potential bias changes the rate-determining step from electron migration in the film at low potentials to photohole capture at relatively high potentials. When the applied potential bias is sufficient, the steady state photocurrent obtained reflects exclusively the rate of photohole capture at TiO2 surface. Under such conditions, the photocatalytic degradation of various organic compounds with different chemical structures was studied.
                  At very low concentrations, the linear increase of steady state photocurrent with the concentration was observed for all compounds investigated, due to the mass transfer limitation, although the number of electron needed for complete mineralization of these compounds differs markedly. It was demonstrated that the substrate molecules that reaches the electrode surface have been exhaustively mineralized under mass transfer-controlled conditions regardless of their chemical nature.
                  At high concentration, substrate molecules (or intermediates) are accumulated on the surface (or in the reaction zone). As a result, the steady state photocurrent deviated from the linear relationship. Under such conditions, the interaction of substrate molecules and/or partially degraded intermediates with TiO2 determines the overall photohole capture rate. The differences in photohole capture rate among different organic compounds were observed. The kinetic characteristics of different organic compounds at high concentrations were also explained based on the structural differences.In the past two decades, TiO To date, most of published research articles in this field have focused on the study of photocatalytic behaviours of one or one type of organic compounds. The photocatalytic behaviours of different compounds may have been studied, but often under different conditions or by different methods. This makes it very difficult to draw conclusive information from these reports that can be used as a general guidance to improve the system performance due to the incomparability of the reported data. This is especially true when the studies are carried out in a TiO Immobilisation of TiO There have been studies where immobilised TiO The main objective of this study is to investigate the relationships between the characteristics of photocatalytic kinetics and the chemical structures of the substrate. In order to achieve this, the photocatalytic behaviors of different organic compounds were systematically characterized under the same experimental conditions at the anatase nanoporous TiO Indium tin oxide conducting glass slides (ITO, 8 Aqueous TiO All experiments were performed at ca. 23 It has been well accepted that the application of an appropriate potential bias to a TiO In order to investigate the influence of the potential bias on the rate of the overall photocatalytic reaction, linear sweep voltammograms of the pure anatase nanoporous TiO  The electron transfer in the photocatalytic oxidation process involves two major processes. One is the electron transport in the semiconductor film and the other is the electron injection at the interface (photohole capture). At low potentials the electron transport in the film controls the overall photocatalytic process, as a result, the photocurrent increases with potential. Since for a given compound, at a given concentration, the rate of electron injection or photohole capture (determined by the concentrations of photohole and organic compounds on TiO The primary function of the applied potential bias in the case of a particulate semiconductor film electrode is to facilitate the freed photoelectrons transport across the semiconductor film to reach the conducting ITO substrate and the external circuit The effect of concentration of the various organic compounds on the steady state photocurrent was investigated. The steady state photocurrent (   Complete mineralization of the simplest aliphatic acids such as formic acid and oxalic acid involve the least number of electrons (i.e. 2e Larger aliphatic acids (malonic acid, succinic acid and glutaric acid) involve larger number of electron transfer, more steps and intermediates during their complete mineralization process.  The magnitude of As presented in the previous sections, in all the cases in low molar concentration range, the According to the semiempirical treatment of steady state mass transfer method If we define a new quantity If we define an arbitrary flux index as Flux Under diffusion controlled conditions, if we assume To examine whether under diffusion-controlled conditions the organic compounds reached the electrode surface are completely mineralized, the For most of the organic compounds, since their diffusion coefficient values are not available, their steady state photocurrents ( From the above discussion, under diffusion-controlled conditions regardless of the chemical structure of the organic compounds, all the substrate molecules reaching the electrode surface are completely mineralized. The deviation of Glucose and methanol are not specifically adsorbed on the electrode surface. The photocurrent concentration relationships deviate from linearity as concentration increases, which is an indication of incomplete mineralization of these reactants reaching the reaction zone. However, the photocurrent increases monotonically with concentration, which indicates the intermediates do not poison the electrode, and the electrode surface is fairly uniform to these molecules in the whole concentration range. This probably is an evidence of indirect photohole transfer mechanism in that the photocatalytic oxidation of these compounds is via the heterogeneous reaction between the surface-bonded hydroxyl radical (or surface-bonded holes) and outer-sphere complexes of these compounds. Once their molecules are within the reaction layer, they get chance to react with surface-bonded holes or hydroxyl radicals. The higher the substrate concentration in the bulk solution the more surface-bonded holes (or surface bound hydroxyl radicals) are captured, as a result, more photoelectrons are freed and less recombination occurs. It is also noted that the values of Another group of organic compounds studied here are formic acid and aliphatic dicarboxylic acids, which can be specifically adsorbed to TiO For the simplest acids such as oxalic acid and formic acid involving the least number of electrons transfer and intermediate steps during mineralization, the For oxalic acid the first phase of increase in Overall, the accumulation of these compounds and their partial-degraded intermediates at the electrode surface does not deteriorate the overall efficiency of the photocatalytic process. The fact that the major surface complexes (at the most abundant sites), accounting for major adsorbed amount, are less photocatalytic active, may be explained by the reactivity differences among the edge, corner titanium sites and the ordinary titanium surface sites. In our previous study, we have found the photocatalytic degradation rate constant for the same adsorbate adsorbed at different types of TiO It is noted in Similarly, for aromatic compounds the increase in At pure anatase TiO Results demonstrated that under diffusion-controlled condition and very low concentrations, all the structurally different compounds investigated are stoichiometrically oxidized to CO This study demonstrated that the photoelectrochemical method can be used to effectively evaluate the photocatalytic activity and photocatalytic oxidation ability of a photocatalyst. The method can be regarded as a useful tool in selecting a photocatalyst for a particular application.