Pharmaceutical treatments can slow bone degradation, thus reducing the fracture risk inherent in osteoporosis. Antiresorptive treatments block the over-activation of osteoclasts vs osteoblasts, but the resulting decrease in bone remodeling frequency may weaken bone structure over time, with no gain in bone volume. Anabolic treatments, however, induce gain in bone volume. The quantitative results from existing studies on the effects of treatments over time are general and non-patient-specific, while numerical models simulating evolution of patient-specific bone microarchitecture consider a spatially random distribution of the remodeling process. Here, we propose a new approach to simulate the remodeling over decades of an individual patient's bone microarchitecture, based on the hypothesis that the oldest sites, which are hypermineralized and more brittle, are remodeled first. Taking these older sites as prime targets of remodeling, simulations show that severe osteoporosis profoundly degrades the mechanical properties of the bone structure, which can be restored and even improved by anabolic, more than by antiresorptive, therapies.Osteoporosis is a major public health problem that reduces both the mass and the quality of bone, thereby increasing the risk of fracture, primarily in the elderly. Pharmaceutical treatments can slow bone degradation and thus reduce fracture risk. For instance, several clinical and experimental studies demonstrated the effects of antiresorptive treatments Imaging tools can provide precise 3D digital reconstruction of bone microarchitecture. Combined with mathematical algorithms of bone remodeling, these developments offer scientists and physicians the prospect of predicting the evolution of each patient's bone microarchitecture over decades, considering its individual pathological, genetic and epigenetic features. The numerical models developed to simulate bone remodeling can predict the evolution of real trabecular microarchitectures, with results comparable to clinical observations In addition to potentially resorbing the bone matrix, regardless of its quality, to maintain plasma calcium homeostasis Several in vivo studies observed that bone microcracks colocalize with hypermineralized areas In the present study, we propose a new approach to simulate bone remodeling based on the hypothesis that the hypermineralized sites are remodeled first. Importantly, the study considers the secondary mineralization of deposited bone after the remodeling cycle. The objectives of this study were to simulate the aging of human trabecular architecture in both normal and osteoporotic cases and to analyze the benefits of pharmaceutical treatments based on either antiresorptive or anabolic agents. We present hereunder the source and properties of the sample of human trabecular bone used as input for the microarchitecture remodeling model. This study used one femoral head from an 87-year-old woman undergoing surgery for femoral neck fracture (T-score of −2.1, DXA exam) in the Orthopedic Surgery Department of the Sainte Marguerite Hospital in Marseille, France. With a T-score of −2.1, the patient was diagnosed with osteopenia. Informed consent was obtained from the patient before treatment. A cubic specimen (10 × 10 × 10 mm Finite element models were generated directly by converting voxels to equally-sized linear eight-node brick elements. For all models, the element material properties were assumed to be isotropic linear elastic. Poisson's ratio was set to 0.3 and the Young's modulus value of each element e, E The Young's modulus distribution over the whole set of voxel elements followed a Gaussian distribution centered at 23 GPa and ranged from 5 GPa to 40 GPa for 97% of elements. This range of tissue stiffness is consistent with the literature The bone remodeling algorithm we propose is an iterative process repeating full 6-month remodeling cycles. Bone resorption and deposition are numerically modeled respectively by deleting or adding voxels in the bone microarchitecture. Mineralization is modeled by the stiffening of the bone matrix over time. The main variables of the model are the total remodeling surface area of the bone microarchitecture, RA, and the gain or loss in bone volume after remodeling, δ. RA reflects the frequency of basic multicellular unit (BMU) activation: the greater the RA, the more osteoclasts are recruited. For instance, in normal aging, RA is equal to 7% because at any time, 7% of the trabecular bone surface is undergoing a 6-month cycle of remodeling Because our aim was to explore only how the biological imbalance between osteoclastic and osteoblastic activities might affect bone remodeling, we considered the mechanical loading as constant and did not incorporate it into the bone algorithm proposed here. The successive steps of the bone remodeling algorithm are presented hereunder. The N resorption pits were identified on the surface according to the degree of mineralization of the tissue underneath, characterized by its local Young's modulus. The most mineralized sites were remodeled first. To represent the typical dimension of 300 µm-diameter hemispherical resorption pit in the trabecular bone model composed of 60 µm voxel elements, we considered a resorption pit 5 elements wide and 2 elements deep, centered on the remodeling site. All the elements circumscribed by the resorption pit were modified by the remodeling process. The remodeling algorithm was integrated into a finite element code, where each iteration corresponds to a full 6-month remodeling cycle Since the aging of bone tissue involves locally increased quantities of minerals that stiffen bone material, aging was modeled here by increasing the local Young's modulus, while the Poisson's coefficient remained constant at 0.3. In the model, at each cycle, all elements except those just deposited stiffen as their mineral content increases over time. To estimate the stiffening rate during secondary mineralization, we combined an expression of local Young's modulus of femur trabecular bone with ash density The parameter K To model a normal remodeling process, RA and δ were given values from the literature, respectively 7% and −5% The osteoporotic case was simulated by doubling the RA and/or δ of the normal aging case Treatment for osteoporosis may involve antiresorptives, also called anticatabolics, which make it possible to block remodeling and thus limit bone microarchitecture degradation. This treatment was simulated by using (RA = 3.5%, δ = −5%) ( Osteoporosis can also be treated by anabolic agents such as parathormone, which stimulate bone formation. To simulate anabolic treatment, it was assumed here that excess bone tissue is deposited at each cycle of remodeling, leading to a positive bone balance δ > 0, i.e. over-activity of the osteoblasts compared to the osteoclasts ( To estimate over time the impact of bone remodeling on the mechanical behavior of bone microarchitecture, we simulated successively, for each bone remodeling year, compression tests on the trabecular bone sample subjected to all cases of bone remodeling: normal or pathological aging, with or without treatment. Based on finite element method, the compression test consisted of imposing −0.15% of deformation on the bone sample. The compression tests were simulated successively in the 3 Simulation of bone remodeling over 20 years in the normal aging case shows a thinning of trabeculae ( A more important decrease in BV/TV was obtained by doubling one or both of (RA, δ) compared to the normal case ( Simulation results indicate that, over a 5-year period, antiresorptive treatment slowed the decrease in BV/TV after 5 years of treatments ( With a remodeling surface (RA) of 7% and positive δ values, the results of the simulations indicate an increase in BV/TV after 5 years of treatment ( To simulate bone remodeling in the normal aging case, we considered that 7% of the surface is remodeled every 0.5 years, the lacuna of resorption is a 0.150 mm-radius half sphere, and osteoblasts deposit 95% of the volume resorbed. Applying this remodeling pattern to a cancellous bone sample with a ratio of BS/BV = 10.18 mm This first simple approach, based on the assumption of preferential old bone turnover, makes it possible to simulate the long-term remodeling of a human bone. By contrast with the models previously developed In the osteoporotic case simulations, BV/TV decreased by 2–5% per decade. These results are consistent with other studies. For instance, Chen et al. 2013 combined several results from different studies on aged and osteoporotic trabecular bone microarchitecture and found a decrease of 22% in BV/TV over 3 decades from the age of 60 to 90 in trabecular bone in vertebra and femur neck Our study indicates that osteoporotic patterns decreased the average apparent Young's modulus of the bone sample by 30–49% during the first 5 years and by 40–66% after 10 years. These levels of alteration in stiffness are consistent with findings from studies using ovariectomized (OVX) rats as an in vivo model of osteoporosis Our results indicate that antiresorptives slowed BV/TV decrease to −0.3% after 5 years and increased apparent stiffness: by 30% compared to osteoporotic patterns (RA = 14%; δ = −5%) and (RA = 7%; δ = −10%) and by 86% compared with the most severe osteoporosis pattern (RA = 14%; δ = −10%). BV/TV maintenance was observed in clinical studies on postmenopausal women treated for one year with alendronate (ALN) Simulation of bone remodeling using the highest anabolic pattern (RA = 7%; δ = 100%) increased BV/TV by 2.5% after 5 years. Compared to the most severe osteoporosis case, this anabolic treatment increased BV/TV by 11%. These results agree with in vivo studies based on OVX rats which showed the same trend with even greater increase. For instance, Shahnazari et al. showed that 4 months of anabolic parathyroid hormone (PTH) treatment increased the vertebral trabecular BV/TV of OVX animals by 53% Our simulations of anabolic treatment increased apparent Young's modulus by 11% compared to initial state and by 125% compared to the most severe osteoporosis. Our results are consistent with other studies reporting benefits from anabolic treatments. For instance, coupling FE analyses with µCT, Graeff et al. estimated similar increases in bone vertebra stiffness: 20% after 1 year of anabolic teriparatide treatment and of 26% after 2 years of treatment Comparing our results with clinical studies might suggest that the anabolic pattern we considered was underestimated. Clinical study from Dempster et al. showed that 36-month anabolic PTH treatment led on osteoporotic women increased BV/TV about 5,2% compared to baseline Our finite element analyses show here that the macroelastic properties of bone increase with time when it remodels under anabolic treatment. If the results of our model can be translated to real cases, the mechanical adaptation of trabecular bone tissue under anabolic treatments appears to rely on thickening of the spans and rigidification of the overall structure. This suggests that anabolic treatments increase the overall rigidity of the bone by modifying its microarchitecture (its volume and the arrangement of the spans). The results of this numerical study agree with clinical observations which show that anabolic agents stimulate bone formation and are effective in the treatment of osteoporosis Our simple approach based on bone remodeling algorithm targeting hypermineralized sites can simulate a relevant temporal evolution of the bone microarchitecture of any patient and thus predict the structural consequences of a bone remodeling scheme corresponding to a given pharmaceutical treatment. In the case of an osteoporotic patient, the model can potentially contribute to clinical decision-making by predicting the long-term structural effect of pharmaceutical treatments. In a future study, it would be interesting to consider a wide range of bone microarchitectures, T-scores, BMD, BV/TV, trabecular thickness and separation, trabecular anisotropy from a panel of osteoporotic patients monitored clinically. This would validate the model by comparing the simulation results to the actual bone microarchitecture after treatment. Moreover, just as the present study aims to identify the influence of pharmaceutical treatments alone on the osteoporotic bone microarchitecture, future models could integrate mechanical loading as one of the main factors controlling bone remodeling to analyze the effect of physical activities in interaction with a given treatment. We have developed a model of the evolution over decades of an individual patient's bone microarchitecture and simulate different treatment scenarios, evaluating their effects on mechanical stiffness of bone at both micro and macro scales. This simple and efficient contribution to existing numerical approaches for bone remodeling may be useful for clinical applications in the treatment of osteoporosis. In the future, routine radiological examination will likely detect the hypermineralized bone matrix, so this type of bone remodeling model targeting aged bone sites may be useful for evaluating the potential effect of medications on a patient's bone microarchitecture. None. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 