The present study is a follow-up of investigation on barite reduction to barium sulfide as a function of starting particle size distribution and temperature of reaction. In this work we study the high temperature reduction process of barite from the view point of particle size distribution. Conversion–time data have been obtained using iodometry method in each isothermal condition. A modified kinetic model used to express the carbothermic reduction process. To obtain the values of activation energy and frequency factor, the same expression was selected for each sample at all temperatures. The rate of reaction is found to be related to the particle size distribution and the gasification reaction of coke which has influence on reduction process. The kinetic parameters calculated from standard analysis of isothermal kinetic data indicated that the particle size of barite controlled the reaction when it was coarser than 400mesh both in presence and absence of catalyst.Barium component such as BaCO The major reducing agent is gaseous intermediate CO which influences the reduction of barite as: In fact the generated CO diffuses and reacts with barite which is not in contact with carbon. The CO On the other hand, the particle size distribution of barite influences the activation energy of reactions. In fact two factors are important in reduction process, the particle size of barite and the gasification of coke. In this study firstly a modified kinetic model has been developed for reduction of barite. Various factors affecting on reduction process have been investigated experimentally. The sodium carbonate and ferric nitrate have been selected as catalysts to study the reaction mechanism. In second step, the influence of barite particle size distribution was taken into consideration to investigate its role on reaction kinetic. The influence of particle size distribution of barite on reduction process has been investigated. At first, an industrial barite ore was selected and the complete chemical and mineralogical analyses were identified by X-ray method. As shown in In order to evaluate the effect of the barite particle size on carbothermic process, coarse-sized (−140, +230 the iodine solution and hydrochloric acid solution was prepared by mixing 50 2 the black ash suspension was added into the iodine and hydrochloric acid solution and stirred for 3 the solution was titrated with 0.1N sodium thiosulfate to obtain straw color in presence of starch indicator. The BaS percentage was calculated by following equation: The experiments, which lead to the exponential construction plots of conversion versus time, enable us to elaborate on the mechanism of reduction process and to estimate the values of activation energy. To compare the effect of particle size distribution on reduction of barite a modified kinetic model, which is related to carbothermic reduction, was applied for all conversion–time data The conversion–time variations were plotted in  The values of activation energy are not significantly different for each group of samples containing different particle size distribution. It is observed that the value of activation energy decreases as particle size distribution of barite is shitted to finer sizes. Activation energy falls down, approximately 9.0 In the first part of the investigation it was inferred that the carbothermic reaction of barite is physically related to gasification process of coke throughout the Boudouard reaction and intermediate gaseous phase diffusion i.e. CO is the rate limiting step in overall reaction. The formation of barium sulfide involves with value of CO that is controlled by gasification of coke. Therefore, decreasing particle size of barite less than −400  The activation energy estimated for reduction of barite in presence of catalysts in three groups of particle size distribution is only slightly different from the values reported in absence of catalyst. Furthermore, the rate of reaction in all cases increases with addition of Na The trend of kinetic parameters shows an overall positive effect in rate enhancement of barite reduction when particle size of barite ranges −230, +400 In the present study, the possible use of different particle sizes of barite in reduction process was investigated in presence and absence of catalyst. From the results obtained by using a modified kinetic model, the following conclusions can be drawn: The presence of 5 The clear variation in particle size distribution and measuring isothermic conversion–time data indicated that the activation energy decreases only 9.0 The addition of ferric nitrate to mixtures of barite and coke could raise the number of active sites of coke. The reason for the increase in of active sites number is the difference in frequency factor of Arrhenius equation. The authors would like to thank Dr. M. J. Mohammadzadeh for his assistance with X-ray diffraction.