In this study, leaching of reverberatory furnace dust at Sarcheshmeh was investigated in H2SO4-O3 medium. Response surface methodology based on central composite face-centered design (RSM-CCF) was applied to optimize the operating parameters. The optimal conditions to achieve the principle objectives of maximizing copper dissolution and minimizing iron dissolution from dust were identified to be a temperature of 30°C, a leaching time of 3h, an initial pH of 0.5, a pulp density of 20%, and an ozone flow rate of 1g/h. Under the optimum conditions, the copper and iron concentrations in the leaching solution were found to be 27.11 and 0.90g/L, respectively. The results showed that selective copper extraction from the dust could be achieved using sulfuric acid and ozone.The antiquated reverberatory furnace technology had been the most widely used method for producing copper matte until the 1970s, until it began to be phased out, and is virtually unused today. The greatest problem faced with reverberatory smelting has been the production of large volumes of dusts and gases containing SO The dust is usually recycled into the smelting circuit, but this operation reduces total production capacity of the plant ( Reverberatory furnaces at Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex (south-east of Iran) produces nearly 30 tons of copper dust per day, having copper content being about 25%. Sulfide minerals are the main constituents of the copper dust ( Conventional leaching processes, such as pressure leaching in ferric sulfate or atmospheric leaching in chloride media, have been extensively in use for copper extraction from sulfide minerals ( Therefore, no sulfur layer is formed on the particles in the presence of ozone. The purpose of this process is to establish optimal conditions to maximize copper dissolution while minimizing iron dissolution, using response surface methodology. Copper and iron concentrations in the leaching solution were taken as the response parameters, with temperature, leaching time, initial pH, pulp density and ozone flow rate considered as process variables. The permissible limit of iron concentration in the leaching solution was considered to be 1 The flue dust studied here was a sample taken from Sarcheshmeh reverberatory furnaces. Screen size analysis showed that about 80% of the particles were finer than 80 Leaching tests were carried out in a 250 After each experiment, the resulting precipitate and the filtrate were separated. Copper and iron concentrations in the filtrate were determined by iodometric titration and ICP-OES (using a VISTA-PRO), respectively. The RSM used in the present work was a central composite face-centered design (fractional). The variables (independent factors) used in this study were temperature (A), time (B), initial pH (C), pulp density (D) and ozone flow rate (E). Meanwhile, copper and iron concentrations in the leaching solution were considered as the responses. Actual and coded levels of each parameter are presented in Experiments were performed in randomized order with three replications of center point. The experimental data is given in Copper and iron concentrations in the leaching solution in terms of coded factors were as follows:  The ANOVA results for these quadratic models are shown in The ANOVA results for the reduced quadratic models are presented in Eq. As it can be seen from Eq. The coefficient of determination (R  It is evident that an increase in the pH had a negative effect on the copper concentration in leaching solution at all temperatures (  The ongoing drive to reduce chemical, material and energy consumption has motivated this investigation to maximize copper dissolution, while minimizing that of iron. Optimal conditions were determined using the previously discussed contour plots, with the permissible limit of iron concentration in the leaching solutions set to 1 The optimized leaching conditions were found to be as follows: temperature For comparison, some tests were conducted in oxygen-sulfuric acid medium. Accordingly, maximum copper concentration in the leaching solution was measured at 18.53 The present study was aimed at assessing the effectiveness of ozone in the presence of sulfuric acid for copper extraction from reverberatory furnace dust. An RSM approach based on CCF was used to design experiments with the criteria to maximize copper extraction while minimizing iron extraction. The proposed quadratic models were in agreement with the experimental data, with high coefficients of determination (R Optimum conditions for the leaching process were determined to be: temperature