The industrial application of the goethite process has been restricted due to the low recovery of zinc and the great loss of lead and silver in zinc calcine with iron residues. In this study, we examined the properties of +35μm zinc calcine and assessed its feasibility for serving as a neutralizing agent in the goethite process. Due to an insoluble fragment or porous structure, the particle size of +35μm zinc calcine only decreased slightly at pH2–3 and 80–90°C. Large differences between iron precipitate and leach residues in the particle size and specific gravity favored the separation, as proven by using the terminal settling velocity deduced from Stroke's law. A combined analysis of environmental scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, energy dispersive spectrometry, and laser particle size analysis provided a fundamental understanding of the properties and behaviors of different particles. This study proved that in the goethite process, +35μm zinc calcine was a suitable neutralizing agent that could work efficiently and be separated easily from iron residues in the goethite process. Moreover, it ensured the high recovery of valuable metals such as zinc, lead, and silver.Iron is present at significantly high levels (3–8%) in zinc concentrates and substituted in the sphalerite lattice [(Zn,Fe)S] and discretes gangue minerals ( To achieve satisfactory goethite properties, low concentration of Fe Compared with other processes, the goethite process is relatively inexpensive to implement because of its ease of operation, low capital cost, and low sulfate residue. However, the goethite process features many drawbacks caused by the calcine neutralizer. First, fine insoluble minerals are difficult to be separated from iron residues, which account for the impurity of iron residues. Secondly, an abundance of insoluble minerals, i.e., zinc, lead, and silver, remains in the iron residues, leading to great loss of valuable metals. Lastly, fine calcine particles provide condensation nucleus for goethite and are encapsulated by iron residues, which prevent calcine dissolution ( In this study, we examined the properties and dissolution behaviors of + The concentrated acidic ZnSO Zinc calcine was screened using a 400 An experiment of + Precipitation experiments were carried out on a 2-L mixed suspension — mixed product removal continuous crystallizer ( Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) and X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) analyses were used for mass balance purposes, and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was used to characterize the crystalline phase. The qualitative and semi-quantitative data from the environmental scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis were indicative of the phases and genesis of particles and thus were used to support the XRD, XRF, and ICP-AES data. Laser particle size analysis (LPSA) was conducted to provide information on the particle size of the + The densities of the iron precipitate and leach residue were measured using an immersion method ( The chemical data ( The SEM images ( The XRD pattern ( Some particles displayed a porous structure while others were compact ( The EDS data (   The densities of the iron precipitate and leach residue were 3.16 and 4.98 With the help of Rayleigh's curve and the Re The goethite process is considered cost-ineffective due to the low recovery of zinc and great loss of valuable insoluble metal (e.g., lead and silver). In the present study, a combined analysis of the +