Hydrogen plasma arc melting (HPAM) of commercial Ti sponges (>99.7%) was examined. Ti sponges had main impurities such as Fe, Al, Cl and Mn. These main impurities could be reduced more efficiently by HPAM than by Ar PAM. Other small amount of impurities also had a tendency of reduction by HPAM. In addition, it was found that each removal degree is attributable to a differential refining effect caused by the difference of initial impurity concentration. For the unique refining effect of HPAM, dissociated and activated hydrogen atoms involved in the high temperature plasma arc are considered to play an important role in the melting process.Plasma arc melting (PAM) is well known as a practical and useful melting method for various metals and alloys We have briefly reported on the experimental result of Ti refining by HPAM in order to compare with thermodynamic estimation Commercial Ti sponges (above 99.7 mass% in purity by the supplier) were used as a starting material. Experiments were carried out using a laboratory-scale plasma arc furnace equipped with a transferred arc type plasma torch, the detailed constitution of which has been described in elsewhere GDMS analytical results of the Ti metal purified by Ar PAM for 40 On the evaluation of trace impurity analysis, when the initial concentration of an impurity is very low, it is very difficult to clarify the concentration behavior of the impurity. Therefore, in order to show the refining effect of HPAM on Ti sponges clearly, we selected the impurities above 3 Purification of Ti sponges by HPAM and purity evaluation using GDMS were carried out. The main impurities, such as Fe, Al and Mn in Ti sponges could be reduced more efficiently by HPAM than by Ar PAM. Furthermore, it was found that each removal degree is attributable to a differential refining effect caused by the difference of initial impurity concentration. This enhancement of RD(%) was attributed to the increase in the surface temperature of molten metal due to the higher thermal conductivity of hydrogen plasma, and the enhancement of metal vapor transfer within the gaseous boundary layer by a dynamic interaction between hydrogen atoms and a metal vapor. This research was supported by the