In the present study, an accurate Bézier based multi-step method is developed and implemented to find the nonlinear vibration and post-buckling configurations of Euler-Bernoulli composite beams reinforced with graphene nano-platelets (GnP). The GnP is assumed to be randomly and uniformly dispersed in the composite mix-proportion, with a random checkerboard configuration. Therefore, a probabilistic model together with an efficient simulation technique is proposed to find the effective moduli of a matrix reinforced GnP. It is worth noting that the presented micro-mechanics model found by the employed Monte-Carlo simulation matches exactly the experimental data and predicts the composite elastic constants more accurate than that found from other common methods, including the Halpin-Tsai theory. Also, for mathematical simplification, the composite beam in-plane inertia is neglected. The presented multi-step method is based on Burnstein polynomial basis functions while shows interesting potential to provide robust solutions for various initial and boundary value problems. It is found that adding a relatively low content of GnP would drastically increase the composite elastic constants, particularly in the transverse direction to fiber. In addition, the numerical results are compared with those provided by exact analytical solutions, where the stability of results suggests the effectiveness of the presented methodology.Thin-walled composite beams are vastly used in many diverse applications namely the fuselage construction in Aerospace industry. To improve the mechanical properties of composite sections, it is an irresistible urge to reinforce them, especially with polymer fillers Apart from that, from the stability point of view, the thin-walled composite sections have relatively lower linear buckling load. Therefore, under an applied axial load, the non-linear response of the composite section would be of interest. In point of fact, the nonlinear post-buckling, as well as the large amplitude vibration analyses of Euler-Bernoulli composite beams, were a point of interest for recent studies Mathematically speaking, the dynamic behavior of Euler-Bernoulli composite beams is generally governed by a nonlinear partial differential equation, where finding an analytical solution for this equation seems to be a great deal. Hence, researchers tried to solve the beam time-dependent response subjected to axial load using the Galerkin method Apart from these well-known numerical techniques, in this article, an accurate and computationally efficient method is developed to solve the governing nonlinear equation using Bézier curves. It should be noted that the idea of using Bezier curves to obtain a solution for nonlinear initial value problems was first introduced by Aghdam et al. 2015, This study presents a Bézier based multi-step method to solve the nonlinear vibration and post-buckling configurations of Euler-Bernoulli composite beams reinforced with random checkerboard graphene nano-platelets (GnP). To this end, the nonlinear governing boundary value equation of motion of the composite beam was converted to a nonlinear initial value problem by applying the shooting method. Then, with the aid of Bernstein polynomial as a basic function of the well-known Bézier curves, the solution for the resulted nonlinear initial value problem IVP is obtained. Furthermore, by evaluating the equation of motion, the post-buckling configuration of the composite beam under an applied axial load is presented. It is worth noting that the GnP orientation, packing arrangement, and spacing in the matrix/resin is modelled in the light of uncertainty, followed by applying a novel Monte-Carlo simulation method to be able to find the composite effective moduli. As presented in this article, the mechanical properties found by the employed checkerboard model matches exactly the experimental results, while the former mico-mechanics models, including the Halpin-Tsai theory, become unrealistic for higher GnP volume fractions. Therefore, the application of the presented micro-mechanics model would illuminate the novelty of the current study and provide a better estimation of the related elastic constants of the studied composite reinforced GnP. In fact, the idea of evaluating the elastic constants of short fiber composite with probabilistic checkerboard model was introduced in the more recent times The mechanical behaviour of random checkerboard graphene nano-platelets composite beams is studied under an applied axial load. The beam configuration is presented in In In where In which In Eq. To find the reduced transformed stiffness matrix, the matrix Young’s modulus reinforced with randomly oriented graphene nano-platelets In Eq. where L, The current concentric cylindrical model could be converted to a Cartesian checkerboard model, where each RVE element has to be transformed into a rectangular GnP element with the same area of In addition, the Eq. In where in which, in which where where the dot superscript implies the derivative of The Bézier based multi-step method is a robust methodology based on Burnstein polynomial basis functions which further extended in this paper to solve the presented initial-boundary value problem where the control points could be defined in a matrix form of where In the multi-step method technique, and for two-dimensional (u, v) analysis, the numerical approximation of an extrapolated point where the general With the aid of Eq. To solve the equation of motion for the Euler-Bernoulli composite beam shown in where In Eq. As shown Furthermore, as discussed earlier, the To solve Eq. To verify the robustness of the present methodology, the fourth order Bézier-based multi-step method is compared to one of the most renowned and strong multi-step techniques, i.e. Adams-Moulton method. In fact, the Adams-Moulton method is an efficient way to solve linear and nonlinear ODEs and PDEs As To find the applied nonlinear post-buckling load acting on the reinforced composite beam, Eq. where the forward divided difference is evaluated using the following formulation Therefore, the axial nonlinear post-buckling load for the given composite beam would be determined as in which Furthermore, at the bifurcation point, the beam deflection is almost zero, that is For further numerical analysis, the reinforced matrix Young’s modulus introduced in Eq. Another critical question must be answered accordingly, and that is out of the employed simulation and Halpin-Tsai theories, which one presents a better estimation of the elastic constants for the composite reinforced GnP. Therefore, it would be of interest to find the related experimental results for the matrix reinforced with graphene nanoplatelets media In order to describe the simulation technique in more detail, the reinforced matrix moduli were evaluated in In the next step, the random short glass-fiber is replaced by graphene nanoplatelets polymers. In this case, the concentric cylindrical model considered in Followed by doing the Monte-Carlo simulation, the matrix young’s modulus reinforced with Graphene nano-platelets As discussed in the previous section, it is of interest to figure out whether the evaluated results for matrix reinforced GnP is realistic or not. Hence in the next step, the results of the Monte-Carlo simulation method and Halpin-Tsai theory are compared together with the experimental results, shown in In the previous sections, the GnP aspect ratio, that is Using the non-dimensional parameters defined in Eq. For a specific nonlinear post-buckling load, the beam deflection would be minimized for a composite with a unidirectional fiber orientation (0, 0, 0) To evaluate the effect of GnP volume fraction on the beam load-deflection for both hinged-hinged and clamped-clamped beams, the data presented in In order to find the dynamic behavior of Euler-Bernoulli composite beam, the nonlinear initial value problem shown in Eq. Then, the Bézier based multi-step method could be applied to Eq. In By implementing the fourth order Bézier method with a step size of Δ In Using the non-dimensional parameters introduced in Eq. Furthermore, the amplitude of vibration has an inverse relationship to the critical buckling load. To clarify this statement, the transverse oriented fiber composite has the maximum amplitude of vibration while providing the minimum axial load. Also, by changing the beam ends support from hinged-hinged to clamped-clamped conditions, the critical buckling load would be increased as well, while the amplitude of vibration would be inversely decreased, see In the next step, the composite beams were assumed to be reinforced by GnP with a specific volume fraction. In To justify this statement and regarding the Tsai micro-mechanics model A computationally efficient technique is presented based on the Bézier curves to solve the governing equations for the nonlinear vibration and post-buckling configurations of Euler-Bernoulli composite beam reinforced with graphene nano-platelets (GnP). Based on the presented results and comparison made with the available analytical solutions, it is found that the Bézier based multi-step method is an accurate and robust procedure to predict the dynamic response of the composite beam reinforced with GnP under an applied axial loading. The whole procedure is based on a proper combination of the shooting method to convert the governing boundary value problem to a system of initial value problems which is then solved by Bézier multi-step method. It is found that for large amplitude vibration, the Bézier method would produce much more accurate results than the Adams-Moulton multi-step technique. Also, by increasing the numerical step size, the Bézier method yields more stable results than the Adams-Moulton method and this fact would lower the computational cost significantly for a specific accuracy. Hence, this fact proposes one of the remarkable superiorities of the present methodology. In addition, the load-deflection diagram, as well as the large amplitude vibration of the composite beam reinforced with GnP, are evaluated for different boundary conditions. Regarding the Monte-Carlo simulation technique, the authors’ interest was to validate whether the employed simulation technique matches the experimental program for ordinary short fibers. As it was shown, out of the four applied theories including Halpin-Tsai, Monte-Carlo simulation, Kalaprasad et al. and Thomason micro-mechanics models, the Halpin-Tsai micro-mechanics model and the simulation technique matches exactly the experimental results. In the next step, it was attempted to figure if it is viable to apply the simulation method for matrix reinforced GnP. As shown in the current study, based on the experimental result, the Halpin-Tsai method, which is commonly used in the literature, matches the experiment data only for lower GnP volume fractions and overestimates Young’s modulus for higher ratios. However, the current Monte-Carlo methods provide an accurate result for both higher and lower GnP volume fractions, which validates the viability of the present methodology for the graphene nanoplatelets application. Finally, it was found that using a low content of GnP would drastically increase the mechanical properties of the composite laminate in the transverse direction. Hence, adding a subtle GnP would enhance the composite in-plane stuffiness, and as a result, would increase the nonlinear buckling load for the Euler-Bernoulli composite beam. H. K. acknowledges partial supports from See