Mechanical milling demonstrates potential in the pretreatment arena to valorize lignocellulosic biomass because it eliminates chemicals and simplifies processing. The development of physical properties and energy consumption for generating micronized particles are key factors affecting potential use. This study investigated the effect of input moisture content, and feedstock particle size on developing physical characteristics of micronized particles and the resultant specific energy consumption in the milling process. Wood particles with different sizes were effectively comminuted to <20-μm within several minutes using a vibratory ring and puck mill. Moisture content was found to be a key factor influencing the development of particle morphology and crystallinity. Lower moisture content resulted in much rounder particles with lower crystallinity, while higher moisture content resulted in the micronized particles with larger aspect ratio and crystallinity. Crystallinity index and median aspect ratio of the micronized particles were linearly correlated. The particle size change during milling was highly correlated to the specific energy consumption of milling through the Rittinger's model (0.91<R2
                     <0.96). Input moisture content and feed size were found to affect the energy intensity of grinding woody biomass. The Rittinger's constant was a good indicator of the material performance in this area. The results will provide a guidance for preferred milling conditions as well as designing scalable micronizing mills.The development of sustainable biofuels from woody biomass is becoming increasingly important for diversifying our transportation energy portfolio and mitigating the global greenhouse gas emission Mechanical deconstruction of biomass offers potential for streamlining processes and enabling supply chains that utilize existing forest products facilities, provide flexibility to operate at various scales, eliminate chemical input, and reduce or eliminating waste water treatment requirements It is apparent that a considerable amount of energy is consumed during size reduction of lignocellulosic biomass The main goal of this study is to delineate the physical property development of micronized particles under various milling conditions and correlate size reduction with energy consumption of the process. The experiments focus on exploring effects of moisture content and feed size for the starting material on changes in particle morphology, cellulose crystallinity, and specific energy consumption of the fine milling process. The knowledge gained in this study will aid in developing potential approaches and strategies for producing a micronized biomass substrate in an economical manner with mechanical pretreatment. Clean, Douglas-fir ( Fine milling experiments were carried out with a high-energy vibratory ring and puck mill (Standard Ring milling, motor power 1.1-kw, Rocklab Pty Ltd., New Zealand). The milling chamber had an inner diameter of 128-mm and height of 43-mm. The grinding media were a ring (inner diameter 78-mm, outside diameter, 100-mm, height 41-mm) and a puck (diameter 52-mm and height 41-mm). Both milling chamber and grinding media were made of tungsten carbide. The milling experiments were designed to investigate different milling variables; these include milling time, initial moisture content, and size of feedstock. The resulting micronized wood powder was then characterized for particle size distribution, aspect ratio, and crystallinity. Milling times were varied from 2 The milling energy consumption of the ring and puck mill was measured with a Fluke 1735 power logger (Fluke, USA). The active power, active energy, power factor, frequency, and time were acquired by computer. The specific grinding energy consumption was calculated using the following relation: The milled wood samples were prepared for particle size distribution and aspect ratio analyses as follows. Each sample was suspended in distilled water to achieve a 0.5% solids mass concentration. For the aspect ratio measurement, a diluted powder suspension was dispersed by adding 1-mL of a dispersant solution (0.1% w/w sodium dodecyl sulfonate) per 100-mg wood The volumetric particle size distribution of the wood powders was analyzed using a laser scattering particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 3000 with Hydro LV wet sample dispersion, Malvern instrument, UK). The median size was used to represent the particles size for analysis. The dimensionless parameter ∆ The solid suspension of samples prepared as described above, was distributed on a silica wafer mounted on a metal stab. This process involved using a pipette to form a droplet with a volume of ca. 200-μL. After allowing the water to evaporate at ambient conditions, samples were sputtered with gold to prepare examination in a scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The measurement of aspect ratio was obtained from the analysis of SEM images using ImageJ (National Institutes of Health, USA) following the procedures described elsewhere X-ray diffractograms of the milled wood particles were obtained using a powder x-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Miniflex 600, Japan) with a Cu Kα (λ The morphology of prepared samples as described above was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy. Images of samples were acquired typically at 20-kV accelerating voltage using FEI Quanta 200F, field emission gun with high vacuum ETD detectors (FEI Company, Hillsboro, Oregon, USA). Prior to imaging, the suspended wet sample was air dried and sputtered with gold for good conductivity. Mechanically fragmenting the lignocellulosic biomass into the micronized size range has been recognized as an essential step to enhance the substrate digestibility of mechanically pretreated substrates by others The median particle size The influence of milling conditions on changes to the shape of micronized particles, as represented by median aspect ratio Besides observing the morphology changes of micronized wood during the milling process, changes in cellulose crystallinity were also characterized. The crystallinity index (CrI) changes of micronized wood produced from various initial moisture contents are delineated in Mechanical milling conditions can generate micronized wood with distinctive particle morphology and crystallinity as discussed above. It is also interesting and essential to investigate the relationships among these structural characteristics of micronized wood for better understanding of sequential particle evolution during milling process. Thus, the changes of median aspect ratio On the other hand, the strength of wood fibers perpendicular to the cellulose fibrils is significantly higher when wood is below the fiber saturation point; ca. 30%. This behavior results from increased hydrogen bonding between cellulose chains that would otherwise be bridged by water molecules The difference of particle aspect ratios for milled wood at various moisture contents is also visually evident. SEM images of micronized particles produced at various moisture contents and a milling time of 12-min are shown in The relations between cellulose crystallinity and particle morphology are depicted in Moisture content is an important factor influencing the glass transition of amorphous polymers in wood cell wall matrix, and the glass transition temperature (Tg) shifts to lower temperature range when moisture content increases Besides the physical properties of micronized particles, specific energy consumption for producing such particles is another important factor for evaluating fine milling performance of woody biomass. Rittinger's model is an appropriate model to describe the fine milling performance, where the new surface area generated per unit mass of the particle is directly proportional to the specific energy consumption for size reduction Linear relationships between specific energy consumption and particle size reduction parameter in Rittinger's model (1/ The specific energy consumption as a function of size reduction parameter (1/ The difference in energy consumption for milling samples with various properties suggests that minimizing the grindability of woody biomass is necessary when using ring and puck mill for fine milling. Therefore, it is reasonable to standardize the milling variables using a reference standard (e.g. chemical composition, moisture content and size) to obtain the grindability of lab-scale test as reported in mineral and biomass industry We effectively micronized softwood Douglas-fir using a vibratory ring and puck mill within several minutes. The effect of substrate properties (i.e., moisture content and initial size) on development of physical properties of micronized particles and specific energy consumption for producing such particles were investigated. Results indicated that moisture content was the most important factor influencing milling behavior in terms of particle morphology and cellulose crystallinity. The lower moisture content samples resulted in much rounder particles with relatively smaller crystallinity than their higher moisture counterparts. The feed size had negligible influence on development of particle physical properties, but only affected the specific energy consumption. A multi-step milling strategy is recommended for a more economical approach for fine milling of woody biomass. The crystallinity and aspect ratio of particles underwent similar development tendency. There was a linear relationship between crystallinity index and median aspect ratio of milled particles. Rittinger's model was ideal for describing the relationship between specific energy consumption, and particle size changes. The constant in this model was a good indicator of grindability of woody biomass with different properties. It is also recommended that standardizing milling test and parameters could benefit to evaluating the grinding performance of fibrous materials on a lab-scale, as such information would be useful for designing scale-up milling facilities of woody and herbaceous biomass feedstock.  Median particle size (μm) The breadth of the particle size distribution (unitless) The value of 50% cumulative aspect ratio distribution (unitless) The difference between the aspect ratios corresponding to 90% and 10% values in the cumulative distribution The specific net energy consumption (kJ/kg or MJ/kg) The milling time (s) The power consumed at time t (W) The average power consumption under idle condition measured from an empty mill (W) The mass charge in kg of wood (kg) The authors are grateful to the financial support from the