An analytical approach is developed to show how particles sparsely distributed in steady and laminar channel flows can be transported for long distances or conversely deposited inside the channel due to the relative importance between the flow-induced drag and gravity forces. More precisely, we establish a rather simple particle trajectory equation which demonstrates that when particles’ inertia is negligible, their behavior is characterized by the channel geometry and by a dimensionless number 
                        W
                      that relates the ratio of the particles sedimentation terminal velocity to the flow mean velocity. The proposed particle trajectory equation is verified by comparing its predictions to particle tracking numerical simulations taking into account particle inertia and fully resolving equations. The equation is shown to be valid under the conditions that flow inertial effects are limited. Based on this trajectory equation, we build a regime diagram that can predict the behavior of particles entering closed channel flows. This diagram, by relating 
                        W
                      to the ratio of the channel mean aperture to its total length, enables to forecast if the particles entering the flow will be either deposited or transported along the channel. The influence of the channel geometry on the particle behavior is then investigated by considering channels with straight and sinusoidal walls. In particular, the effect of the corrugation amplitude, of the asymmetry and of the phase lag between the walls on the extent of the transport and deposition zones is evaluated and verified against numerical experiments. Firstly, it is shown that the regime diagram for straight channels can be used for wavy channels with in-phase walls. Secondly, it is found that increasing the phase lag between the two walls and/or the walls corrugation amplitude leads to an increase of both the transport and sedimentation zones. Finally, it is demonstrated that increasing the lower wall corrugation amplitude relatively to the upper wall corrugation enhances particle transport.Understanding the transport and deposition of inertial particles in channel flows is of fundamental importance in many environmental issues, such as underground pollution or fracture hydraulics, and in several industrial applications, like water filtration or mineral separation. The equation of motion for small rigid spherical particles in non-uniform unsteady flows at low Reynolds number was rigorously derived by Maxey and Riley The motion of inertial particles can be very complex even when particles are passive and have non-Brownian dynamics (Babiano et al. For particle motion in closed channel flows, most previous works focused on the phenomena of particle migration across the streamlines. It was found that both neutrally and non-neutrally buoyant particles can migrate across the streamlines to some equilibrium positions within the channel. For instance, Segre and Silberberg Taking into account particle inertia, Jebakumar et al. In the present work, our aim is to study the transport and deposition of non-Brownian small spherical particles immersed in closed channel flows, by calculating the well-defined particle trajectories. Particle inertia, which is defined by the particle response time, is so weak that the focusing phenomenon observed in The paper is organized as follows. In Section We consider 2D flows. The domain is represented in a reference frame ( When the particle diameter is small and when the Reynolds number as well as the velocity gradients around the particle are small, the equation of motion of a solid spherical particle of radius Under these conditions, i.e. neglecting Basset force and Faxen corrections terms, and developing the terms of the right-hand side of Eq. According to Eq. Choosing Knowing the particle initial position We consider a 2D closed channel defined by the domain:  Under the LCL assumption, the components of the fluid flow velocity vector, expressed in Using Eqs. Eq. We consider the simple case of a horizontal channel of total length Integrating Eq. For the case of a channel with sinusoidal walls, the walls are defined by : In this section, we verify Eqs. Finite Element Method is used to solve the flow equations and a Lagrangian Tracking technique is used to track the particles motion in the flow by integrating the particles motion equation (Eq. The ordinary differential equation used in the simulations is Eq.  The geometry of the channel is first defined. In the case of a straight channel, it is represented by a horizontal rectangle defined by the channel aperture as its width and the channel total length as its length. In the case of a channel with sinusoidal walls, the two walls are constructed according to the expressions of The computational domain is discretized by using triangular meshes ( A parabolic velocity profile with a mean flow velocity The continuity and Navier–Stokes equations governing the steady incompressible flow in the channel are solved, and the pressure and velocity fields are computed. In this case, the continuity equation that represents the conservation of mass reads as: The properties of the particles (density and diameter) and their number are determined based on the value of The last step of the simulation consists in calculating the particle trajectories by solving the equation of motion for each particle (Eq.   Eq.   To further study the validity of the LCL, the velocity profiles computed from Navier–Stokes (NS) equation were compared to the LCL solution (Eq.   To verify Eq.  To verify Eq.  In the two previous sections, we verified the particle trajectory equations in straight and wavy channels for specific geometries. However, according to Eq. In order to verify the dependency of particle trajectories on   The error between the numerical and analytical solutions can be due to: (i) errors in the numerical simulations, (ii) the assumptions under which the analytical model was developed such as the use of the LCL as a solution of Navier–Stokes equation or, (iii) the negligence of particle inertia. To investigate the origin of this error, the numerical solution of case 5, where the maximum relative error is equal to 5.11%, was recalculated 4 times under different conditions. The outcomes of this series of tests are as follows:  When the mesh size is reduced by half, the maximum relative error remains equal to 5.11%. When the time step used to update the particle position is reduced by a factor of 2, the maximum relative error remains equal to 5.11%. When the particle inertia is neglected, the maximum relative error decreases slightly to 5%. When the Stokes equation is solved instead of Navier–Stokes equation (to neglect fluid inertia), the maximum relative error decreases to 4.08%. Taking into account these results, it is clear that the numerical errors are limited since the relative error between the two solutions keeps similar whatever the mesh or time step refinement. On the other hand, neglecting particle and fluid inertia seems to reduce the relative error between the two approaches. According to Section As illustrated in the previous section, the trajectories of small particles with very small inertia, in channel flows satisfying the LCL approximation, depend on the channel geometry and on the dimensionless number     The arbitrary selection of the separating percentages 25% and 75% defining the transport regime will be discussed later on. The dependence of these different regimes on The channel geometry is defined by the dimensionless parameter  Transport: Sedimentation : Transition :   To verify numerically the regime diagram obtained for straight channels, a numerical experiment was conducted using the same particle tracking technique presented in Section  The channel is here defined by the following dimensionless parameters: the average corrugation amplitude The study for this type of channel is slightly more complex than for straight channels because three additional geometrical parameters need to be taken into account ( The main emerging result is that, whatever the walls amplitudes and horizontal shift are, the variations of  channel having in phase walls ( channel having out of phase identical walls ( channel having walls with maximum phase lag ( In this case, there is no horizontal shift   In this case, the two walls are identical,     Let us consider     To investigate the effect of the phase lag between the walls on particle transport,   To further illustrate these variations, we compared two different cases considering   In this type of channel, the horizontal shift between the walls is maximum (    To further illustrate these variations, we compared two different cases considering the   The behavior of weakly inertial particles injected in a channel laminar flow depends on the dimensionless number It was found that the two different configurations of a straight channel and a channel with in phase sinusoidal walls ( In channels with two identical walls ( We present a study on the transport of particles with low inertia, in 2D closed channel flows. The flow is assumed to be laminar and dominated by viscous forces, characterized by low values of We show that when particle inertia is neglected, the particle behavior can be characterized by a dimensionless number Based on these developments, a regime diagram was established, which predicts the transport or the sedimentation of particles as a function of The results presented in this study describe in which way the geometry of a wavy channel affect the transport and the deposition of particles as well as the distance at which they will deposit inside the channel. It is believed that the proposed regime diagrams could help designing particle separation devices that can be of use in mineral processing or microfluidics and it may even give some insights into the transport of sediments in natural fractures. An experimental verification is required as a next step and is currently undergoing. In addition, the analytical approach is being considered to extend to different flow regimes and to include other hydrodynamic forces on particles.