Symbolic Regression (SR) analysis, employing a genetic programming (GP) approach, was used to analyse laboratory strength and elasticity modulus data for some granitic rocks from selected regions in Turkey. Total porosity (n), sonic velocity (vp), point load index (Is) and Schmidt Hammer values (SH) for test specimens were used to develop relations between these index tests and uniaxial compressive strength (σ
                     
                        c
                     ), tensile strength (σ
                     
                        t
                     ) and elasticity modulus (E). Three GP models were developed. Each GP model was run more than 50 times to optimise the GP functions. Results from the GP functions were compared with the measured data set and it was found that simple functions may not be adequate in explaining strength relations with index properties. The results also indicated that GP is a potential tool for identifying the key and optimal variables (terminals) for building functions for predicting the elasticity modulus and the strength of granitic rocks.Strength, which is the stress at which a material ruptures or fails, is an essential parameter in the design and construction of underground structures in rock masses. Uniaxial compressive, tensile, shear and flexural strengths are commonly used parameters in rock engineering design. In addition, modulus of elasticity is directly related to the strength of rocks. There have been many attempts to understand the relation between strength and other properties of rocks such as Point Load Index, Schmidt Hammer Rebound Values, Ultrasonic Velocity and moisture content ( Symbolic regression (SR) defines a process of finding a function that fits a given finite data set as well as providing a method of function identification ( In the current study, the GP approach is described in In this section, the GP paradigm will be discussed and the essentials of GP will be highlighted briefly. Further concepts and terminology behind GP can be found from the inventor of this paradigm ( Genetic programming is an extension of the conventional genetic algorithm (GA), generating novel solutions to complex problems, developed by As stated earlier, CP is composed of functions and terminals. The functions can be standard arithmetic operations, e.g. Genetic operations used in GP are composed of     The Resulting offspring after crossover operation are As can be seen from the above expressions, crossover between S-expressions consists of swapping the randomly selected sub S-expressions.  The analysis was based on three main stages. In the first stage, members of the terminal were selected. The term According to the selected There are three models developed to establish the relationship between the rock properties given in Some of the mathematical functions included in the GP are protected against zero division or negative square root. In the division operation, if the denominator is equal to zero then the results return to the numerator. The protected natural logarithm, ln( A lexicographic parsimony pressure (lexictour) procedure for the reproduction in GP analysis was used for selection of parents as the method controls bloat. The expected number of offspring for each individual was determined with a rank89 selection method. In this method, the probable number of offspring for each entity is based on its rank in the population and on the state of the algorithm (how far it is from the maximum allowed generation). The differentiation between individuals increases in later generations ( The results for each model were evaluated after 50 computer runs. The best function found for each model was stored and converted to a corresponding mathematical formula. The results were compared with a measured data set. In most cases, sample-population size is context-dependent and not always the main issue; it is only one aspect of the quality of a study design ( All data sets were used for testing and training. This might have caused a slight over-fitting. It is recommended that for the future application of the GP model developed here, a large number of data set with 80% training and 20% testing set, as suggested by A curve fitting tool in MATLAB was utilised during the course of the statistical evaluation of the GP models developed. The Linear Least Square method with the bisquare robust technique was selected for fitting. The fitting was accomplished by minimizing the summed square of the residuals and down weight outliers using bisquare weights. In most cases, this is the best choice for robust fitting. The quality of the fit was summarised in terms of the Sum of Squared Error ( The coefficient of multiple determination (  The developed model for the calculation of the In contrast to the GP- An evolutionary approach was adopted in this particular research to investigate the relationship between index properties and mechanical properties of granitic rocks. Very good predictions were achieved using the functions and terminals developed in this research for the elasticity modulus, uniaxial compressive strength, and uniaxial tensile strength of some granitic rocks from different regions in Turkey using the variables given in The author would like to express his gratitude to Prof. Stephen Priest and Prof. John Sturgul and anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on the paper. Also, special thanks go to A/Prof David Walker for reviewing the manuscript.