In Fe–10Mn–2Cr–1.5C alloy the superlattice diffraction spots and satellite reflections have been observed by transmission electron microscopy, these results show that the ordering structure and modulated structure have taken place in this alloy. X-ray diffraction proved that austenitic steel in this alloy is more stable than in traditional austenitic manganese steel. Based on this investigation, we consider that the C–Mn ordering clusters were existing in austenitic manganese steel and the chromium could strengthen this effect by linking the weaker C–Mn couples together. These structures may play an important role in the work hardening of austenitic manganese steel.The high work hardening of austenitic manganese steel may be one of the most important properties for this material, but until now its mechanism remains uncertain. It was first thought that the hardening appeared with strain-induced martensite transformation of γ to α or ε In the present study, the superlattice diffraction spots and satellite reflections have been observed by transmission electron microscopy in austenitic manganese steel, which contained 2%(mass) chromium. This may imply that the C–Mn short-range ordering structures are indeed existing in traditional austenitic manganese steel. When chromium is contained in this material, it can increase this effect and enlarge the ordering structures and therefore, transmission electron microscopy can detect the effect. The alloy for the present study was melted in an induction furnace. The chemical composition is 10.02% Mn; 1.58% C; 2.75% Cr; 0.51% Ni, 0.04% Re. The specimens were solution treated in a salt bath at 1373 K for 2 h and water-quenched, and then tempered at different temperatures, respectively. The structures of this alloy were characterized by X-ray diffractometer with Cu-Kα radiation at 35 KV and 30 mA. The transmission electron microscopy specimens were sparks eroded in 0.15×10×10 mm  Previous studies In this model, atom distribution in a f.c.c. cell is as follows: The structure factor Here Also from Where λ is the average modulation wavelength,  In fact, Dastur and Leslie To improve the wear resistance of austenitic manganese steel, Dastur et al. In this study, the superlattice spots and satellite reflections have been observed in Fe–10Mn–2Cr–1.5C alloy with transmission electron microscopy. It is shown that the ordering structure and modulated structure have taken place in this alloy. This is because the C–Mn ordering clusters in austenitic manganese steel have been strengthened and enlarged by chromium. X-ray diffraction has proved that the austenitic in this alloy is more stable than traditional Hadfield steel. Therefore, we consider that the C–Mn ordering clusters exist in austenitic manganese steel, and chromium can promote their growth. This structure may be a major factor contributing to work hardening of austenitic manganese steel. The authors are grateful to Mr Yaguo Li for his assistance in TEM operation, and also to Mr Xiaolin Chen, Jian Fu, Ms Yujiao Wu and Ms Jun Tang for their assistance in specimen preparation.