The computation of loads, torques and power consumption of hot rolling processes conducted at industrial scale requires a detailed analysis of the work-hardening rate of the material, as well as a precise description of the changes in flow stress with microstructure and deformation conditions. The present work describes two rational experimental methodologies that can be applied in order to accomplish this analysis, which encompasses the determination of the athermal stress, as well as the temperature and strain rate dependence of both the yield and saturation stresses of the material. The evolution of the flow stress in the course of plastic deformation is determined by means of the numerical integration of the phenomenological exponential-saturation work-hardening law advanced by Sah, J.P., Richardson, G., Sellars, C.M., 1969. Recrystallization during hot deformation of nickel. J. Aust. Inst. Met. 14, 292–297 expressed in differential form. In this way, it is possible to compute the current value of the flow stress in terms of its previous value and to update the changes in deformation temperature and strain rate that occur after each strain interval during the course of plastic deformation, as expected in industrial hot working processes. In the present work, these methodologies are applied to the analysis of the work-hardening transients of a number of stress–strain curves obtained for a C–Mn steel deformed under plane strain compression conditions, in the temperature range of 1123–1373K, at strain rates in the range of 0.4–24s−1. The results indicate that both the work-hardening rate and flow stress of the material can be satisfactorily described for most deformation conditions. It is shown that by employing the Sellars–Tegart–Garofalo model and the Zener–Hollomon parameter, in order to account for the temperature and strain rate dependencies of the stress parameters, the accuracy in the description of the experimental flow stress can be improved, but at the expense of an increase in the number of material parameters involved in the analysis. The limitations of employing a single internal state variable for the computation of the work-hardening rate and flow stress have also been discussed.material constant material constant, s material constant, s material constant, s burgers vector, nm experimental normalized activation energy experimental normalized activation energy Boltzmann’s constant, J material constant material constant material constant universal gas constant, J activation energy, J activation energy, J activation energy, J absolute temperature, K Zener–Hollomon parameter, s material constant, MPa effective strain relaxation strain effective strain rate, s material parameter, s  shear modulus at 0 effective stress, MPa athermal stress, MPa yield stress, MPa contribution of solid solution hardening to the flow stress at 0 saturation stress, MPa saturation stress at 0 material parameter, MPa material parameter, MPa athermal work-hardening rate, MPa Industrial hot rolling operations of commercial C–Mn steels are very complex processes, which involve the plastic deformation of the material under varying deformation conditions, leading to significant changes both in microstructure and mechanical properties. As an example, the hot rolling schedule of medium C–Mn steels carried out by means of a 4-high Steckel rolling mill is usually conducted by applying 14 rolling passes, starting at a mean temperature of 1223 By the end of the rolling schedule the mean slab temperature has decreased to approximately 806 Since the expected loads, torques and power consumption of the rolling mill are significant dependent on the strength and work-hardening characteristics of the material under processing, modeling and optimization of these complex rolling schedules require a precise description of the changes in such mechanical properties of the alloy. However, given the fact that the deformation of the material occurs under varying deformation conditions, as indicated above, it would be expected that the description of the changes in its mechanical strength fulfills three basic conditions. Firstly, that the work-hardening behavior of the material is described in differential form as a function of the flow stress and deformation conditions, which rules out the use of strain as valid state parameter. Secondly, that the flow stress itself is computed by the integration of such differential equation, by means of the updating of the changes in deformation conditions after each strain increment, during every numerical iteration. Thirdly, that the complete description of the flow stress in terms of microstructure and deformation conditions can be accomplished by employing just a small number of material constants. As indicated by The descriptions of the change in strength with deformation temperature and strain rate more commonly reported in the literature are carried out by means of the widely known hyperbolic sine relationship between the temperature-compensated strain rate parameter However, in many of these models, the flow stress of the material is still expressed in the form of an integrated work-hardening law as a function of the applied strain which, as discussed above, is not a valid state parameter. Although such approaches could be employed for the description of the changes in the flow stress under monotonic deformation conditions, these cannot be employed under varying conditions of temperature and strain rate. This is also the case for those models which combine polynomial fitting and artificial neural networks modeling with the STG model, for determining the strain dependence of the different parameters involved in the flow stress description ( An entirely different and more rational approach is that employed for the constitutive description of both ferrous and non-ferrous materials in a wide spectrum of deformation temperatures and strain rates, based on physically founded models ( Thus, the present investigation has been carried out in order to conduct a rational analysis of the work-hardening behavior of a C–Mn steel deformed under hot working conditions, which fulfils all the basic requirements that have been outlined for the correct prediction of the flow stress during industrial hot rolling operations. Firstly, the analysis is based on the rational determination of fundamental parameters, which have a clear physical significance and which describe the contribution of both athermal and solid solution hardening to the flow stress. Secondly, the work-hardening rate is expressed in differential form in terms of the non-evolutive components of the strength indicated above, as well as in terms of the current flow stress, in such a way that the applied strain is not employed as state parameter. Thus, the formulation can be employed for the prediction of the flow stress under varying deformation conditions, by updating the changes in deformation temperature and strain rate after each strain increment of the deformation history. Thirdly, the description only requires the determination of a few material parameters, which is accomplished by employing the experimental data collected during the tests. The present analysis has been conducted employing the work-hardening transients of a number of effective stress–effective strain curves obtained from samples of a commercial C–Mn steel, usually employed for structural applications, of the following composition (wt.%): 0.11 C, 1.11 Mn, 0.26 Si, 0.03 P, 0.002 S and bal. Fe. At room temperature, the microstructure of the alloy is composed of approximately 80% ferrite and 20% pearlite, with a mean ferritic grain size of approximately 10  In the present work, the experimental analysis of the work-hardening behavior of the material has been carried out in two different ways. Both methodologies employed require primarily the determination of the athermal stress, as well as a close examination of the changes both in the yield and saturation stresses with the deformation conditions, specifically deformation temperature and strain rate. As shown in The preliminary determination of the athermal stress can be carried out by analyzing the change in the normalized yield stress extracted from the stress–strain curves obtained at different deformation temperatures and at the smallest strain rate employed in the plane strain compression tests, in this case of approximately 0.4 Once the athermal stress has been determined, a preliminary analysis of the temperature and strain rate dependence of the yield stress can be readily carried out. Thus, In the above equation, The results obtained from this preliminary analysis are shown on the plot and it can be observed that the value of As shown in An important problem in the present analysis is the selection of an appropriate work-hardening law for the description of the work-hardening transients, as well as the identification of the corresponding saturation stress value that would be attained at each deformation temperature and strain rate, if dynamic recrystallization did not come into operation. In the present work, this goal has been achieved by means of the use of the phenomenological exponential-saturation work-hardening law earlier advanced by In the above equation, In this manner, it was possible to identify the values of In this case, the parameter However, given the fact that industrial hot working operations take place under varying deformation conditions, in which the deformation temperature decreases and the strain rate increases throughout the process, Eq. Nevertheless, for this purpose the relaxation strain, In which In the present work, the numerical integration of Eq. Thus, the flow stress can be updated regarding any change in deformation temperature and strain rate experienced by the material after each strain increment in the course of plastic deformation. The final values of all the parameters that are employed for the description of the work-hardening rate of the material can be determined from the experimental data collected during the tests, taking into consideration that during some of the tests, particularly at the lower deformation temperatures and high strain rates, the material experiences an increment in the deformation temperature due to deformational heating. Such a computation can be carried out employing non-linear least squares analysis.  Several solid and dotted lines are observed for different tests conducted at nominally the same temperature and strain rate. This result is due to the fact that changes in deformation conditions during plane strain compression testing (under supposedly constant deformation conditions) lead to different experimental stress–strain curves as well as distinct computed curves, since the model employed takes into account the entire temperature and strain rate history of the material. A comparison between the experimental and computed values of the flow stress, as shown in A plausible modification of the present description of the work-hardening of the material could be carried out by incorporating the STG model in a rational manner in order to account for the changes in the yield and saturation stresses with temperature and strain rate. Thus, according to Eq. and In the above equations, The different material constants involved in Eqs. Thus, On the other hand, The description of the work-hardening rate of the material and the computation of the flow stress either by means of Eqs. Also, a rational procedure for the determination of the main contributions to the flow stress, namely the athermal, yield and saturation stresses, provides a physical basis to the work-hardening description. Thus, in the case of the simplified MTS model, a comparison between the normalized activation energies obtained from the analysis of the yield and saturation stresses indicates the existence of highly localized interactions of dislocations with obstacles of similar activation volumes. At yield, dislocations interact with solute atoms, whereas at large plastic strains, dislocation motion is limited by dislocation–dislocation interactions. In the case of the STG model the comparison of the final values of the activation energies The fact that in both methodologies the flow stress is determined from the numerical integration of the expression provided for the work-hardening rate, allows the consideration of the changes in deformation temperature and strain rate that actually occur after each strain increment during the complete history of the hot-working process. In order to illustrate this point, The two different approaches followed in the present work for the description of the work-hardening rate and the computation of the flow stress from its expression in differential form fulfill all the conditions required for modeling of hot-working processes. However, it is important to point out that there still are some limitations, particularly in relation to the obstacles that hinder dislocation motion after yielding. As pointed out by  A rational description of the work-hardening rate of a C–Mn steel deformed under plane strain hot-working conditions in a wide spectrum of temperatures and strain rates has been presented following two different methodologies. For this purpose, the differential form of the phenomenological exponential-saturation work-hardening law advanced by Sah et al. has been employed, which expresses the work-hardening rate as a function of the yield and saturation stresses, as well as the athermal work-hardening rate and flow stress itself. In the first methodology, the temperature and strain rate dependences of the yield and saturation stresses have been implemented by means of a velocity-modified parameter similar to that originally proposed by MacGregor and Fisher. The numerical integration of the differential equation which describes the work-hardening rate allows the computation of the flow stress of the material from its previous value, after updating in each strain interval the changes in deformation temperature and strain rate that might have occurred in the course of plastic deformation. This procedure provides a satisfactory description of the experimental values of the flow stress and work-hardening rate of the alloy. A plausible modification of this model has also been proposed, by introducing the temperature and strain rate dependencies of the yield and saturation stresses through the Sellars–Tegart–Garofalo model, which involves the Zener–Hollomon parameter. It has been shown that, according to this second methodology, an accurate description of the flow stress can also be obtained, but at the expense of an increase in the number of material parameters involved in the formulation. The limitations of both approaches have also been analyzed in the light of the considerations earlier advanced by Estrin regarding the use of at least two internal state variables and their coupled evolution during plastic deformation, for the description of the appropriate dislocation reactions. The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful observations and comments made by Dr. P. Follansbee prior to the submission of the manuscript. Professor Puchi-Cabrera also gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Conseil Régional Nord-Pas de Calais, France, through the International Chair program 2011, as well as the CDCH-UCV through the project PG-08-7775-2009/2.