In this study, a novel metal assisted chemical leaching (MACL) was proposed to remove impurities from metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si). HF acid leaching, one step MACL (1-MACL, HF + AgNO3) and two step MACL (2-MACL, HF + AgNO3 + H2O2) were employed to purify MG-Si. The typical precipitates at Si grain boundaries before and after leaching were observed and analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The leaching results show that the impurities removal efficiency is 2-MACL > 1-MACL > HF acid leaching. After 2-MACL, the impurities (Fe, Al, Ca, Ti, Mn, Ni, Cu, V, Cr, Ag, B and P) concentration can be reduced from 4550.40 ppmw to 106.09 ppmw and the purity of MG-Si increased from 99.55 to 99.99%. It is notable that the introduction of micro-scale “channels” can facilitate the impurities removal when compared to solely HF leaching, especially for some non-dissolving metallic impurities like copper, calcium and aluminum. It should be noted that 2-MACL has obvious effect on the removal of non-metallic impurities B and P.Solar energy is an important source of eco-friendly and renewable energy ( The production of solar grade silicon by the metallurgical method mainly includes slag treatment ( Recently, metal assisted chemical etching (MACE) as a new technique that can introduce porous structure which has become a research focus ( The MG-Si chunk feedstock which came from the same production batch was produced by industrial silicon company in Yunnan, China. And they were operated by hammer to some small chunks. Before experiments, two types of samples were prepared. The first sample was prepared by crushing the small MG-Si chunks into powders. The pulverized MG-Si was sieved into powders of proper sizes, between 75 and 150 μm, using a sieve shaker. The sieved powders were then cleaned using distilled water and ethanol in an ultrasonic cleaner. This sample was prepared to research for removal of impurities from MG-Si with/without the MACL. In order to check the morphologies of precipitates and study the evolution of MG-Si after leaching with different methods, the second sample was prepared by slicing the mounted MG-Si chunk into square wafers (20 × 20 × 2 mm Leaching experiments were performed in a self-assembly and closed experimental installation, which was placed on a mechanical stirrer. 5 g MG-Si powders were added into 100 mL leaching solution for 2 h at 298 K. All experiments were carried out under the HF concentration of 4.6 mol L The concentrations of impurities in MG-Si powders before and after leaching were determined by an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Optima 8000, Perkin Elmer, US). Surface areas of porous silicon were tested by BET surface area analyzer (ASAP2020, Micromeritics, US). The surface of morphology and composition of the precipitates in MG-Si before and after leaching were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI QUANTA200) and electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA, JXA8230, JEOL, Japan) under the accelerating voltage of 20 kV and the beam current of 2 × 10 The impurities (metallic: Fe, Al, Ca, Ti, Mn, Ni, Cu, V, Cr Ag; non-metallic: B, P) concentration in the initial metallurgical grade silicon and their segregation coefficient between solid and liquid silicon are listed in The concentrations of impurities in the MG-Si powder sample after MACL process are listed in Compared with surface morphology in As shown in Ag cathode: The overall reaction: Afterwards, these porous structure created by MACL would provide numerous micro-scale “channels” for a better contact between impurities and lixiviant during leaching. By comparing the experimental results of 1-MACL and 2-MACL, it is clear that the porous morphology of porous silicon produced by different methods is quite remarkable. With 2-MACL, H The purification of MG-Si, without MACL, was investigated under the same experimental conditions for comparison purposes. As shown in Although HF shows the high-efficiency for impurities removal from MG-Si, the purity could be enhanced with MACL (shown in The concentrations of B and P have great influence on the performance of solar photovoltaic cells. Since they have relatively high segregation coefficients between solid and liquid silicon are generally tend to distribute uniformly in silicon lattice, acid cleaning is not so effective to remove them. As can be seen in As shown in The purification of MG-Si with the MACL was investigated in this paper. MACL have an excellent effect on the removal of impurities from the MG-Si, especially for 2-MACL (from 4550.40 ppmw to 106.09 ppmw). With MACL, the formation of pores would provide micro-scale “channels” for a better contact between impurities and acid during leaching. The purity of the MG-Si improved from 99.55 to 99.99% after 2-MACL processing, which is higher than 99.97% obtained with HF lixiviant alone. The results show that impurities removal increased greatly with MACL, especially for Cu, the removal of Cu increased to 87.2% and 91.3% respectively. Similarly, the removal of the non-dissolving elements in the HF acid like calcium, aluminum maximally increased to 95% and 96.8% via 2-MACL. Furthermore, it is important to note that MACL is also effective on the removal of non-metallic impurities B and P. After 2-MACL process, the removal efficiency of B and P can be enhanced to 86.1% and 71.3%, respectively. Financial support of this work from the