Inspired by the integrated adsorption/degradation purification performances of paddy soil, a biomimetic paddy-soil-like superior purification material has been hydrothermally synthesized from natural zeolites. The formations of tobermorite and hydroxyapatite benefited the flexural strength up to 12 MPa and adsorptive properties to contaminants. In sewage treatment experiments, the zeolite-based materials achieved the limited removal rates of 34.6% (from 364 to 238 mg/L) and 26.3% (from 46.6 to 34.3 mg/L) respectively for COD and NH4
                     + due to saturation adsorption. After bioburden, the removal rate of COD and NH4
                     + increased significantly to 93.4% (from 364 to 24 mg/L) and 81.1% (from 46.6 to 8.8 mg/L), reflecting the integrated function of adsorption and further degradation. The variations of NO3
                     −/NO2
                     − showed that various microorganisms within the matrix did contribute to the continuous and efficient purification performance.Heavy metals and organic pollutions are two major contaminants for water pollution, generally treated by either adsorption or degradation techniques now. However, the existing absorbents are restricted by adsorption saturation Paddy soil has been found to possess a superior purification capacity for field water owing to its adsorption and degradation performances contributed by the porosity of the soil and the soil organisms within Natural zeolites, one of the main minerals in soil, have wide application in wastewater treatment Hydroxyapatite has been extensively studied for its biocompatibility and potential for heavy metal adsorption Such biomimetic sewage purification materials with both adsorption and degradation function have not been reported before. The objective of the work was to synthesize the biological zeolite-based materials and then cultivate microorganisms on it, and then revealed the superior purification capacities and purification mechanisms of the materials via the concentration variations of chemical oxygen demand (COD), ammonia nitrogen (NH Natural zeolite was purchased from Lingshou Hengyang Minerals Processing Plant (Hebei, China). Analytically pure Ca(OH) The ground zeolite mixed with Ca(OH) To cultivate microorganisms on the biological matrix, 35 vol% ground specimens, 60 vol% Czapek–Dox medium and 5 vol% supernatant of activated sludge were aerated for 3∼5 days. Then the model wastewater The purification capacities were characterized by variations in the concentration of COD (potassium dichromate method), NH  Meanwhile, the flexural strength of the specimen at 10 h reaches up to 12 MPa. According to our previous work COD and NH  Nitrification and denitrification are generally characterized by the concentration variations of NO A tough and biomimetic paddy-soil-like purification material has been hydrothermally synthesized from natural zeolites. The porosity and adsorption capacity of zeolites could be retained for mild hydrothermal conditions. The formations of tobermorite and hydroxyapatite benefited the strength, biocompatibility and adsorption properties of the synthesized materials. The zeolite-based materials achieved the removal rate of 34.6% and 26.3% for COD and NH The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. The work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 