The ability of lignite-activated carbon (LAC) and iron-impregnated activated carbon (FeAC) obtained from Gölbaşı lignite to remove cyanide ions from aqueous solution by adsorption was researched and compared with each other. The same process was applied also with commercial activated carbons which are in both granular (CAC-1) and powder forms (CAC-2). The morphologies, structures and properties of the activated carbons were determined by BET, XRD, XRF, SEM, zeta meter and magnetometer, respectively. The effects of various experimental parameters, such as initial cyanide concentration, pH, adsorbent type and particle size were researched in a batch adsorption technique at a temperature of 25°C. BET surface area of LAC is determined as 921m2/g. The obtained magnetic activated carbon has high surface area of 667m2/g with 19wt.% Fe3O4 coated and perfect magnetic separation performance. Langmuir model was found to be the best representative for cyanide-adsorption. The maximum monolayer adsorption capacities of LAC and FeAC are 60.18mg/g and 67.82mg/g at pH values of 7–7.5 and 64.10mg/g and 68.02mg/g at pH values of 10–10.5, respectively. Kinetic evaluation indicated that the cyanide adsorption onto the obtained activated carbons followed the pseudo-second order rate reaction. The diffusion-controlled kinetic models on the cyanide-adsorbent system showed that the removal rate was controlled not only by intraparticle diffusion but also by film diffusion. All experimental results point out that the LAC and FeAC are viable candidates for the removal of cyanide from water and wastewater.In gold and silver leaching operation, cyanide is mostly used for extracting gold and silver from finely disseminated ores owing to its potential applicability and low cost Removal of cyanide from aqueous solution is required when human health and protection of ecosystems are considered. Especially, at last decade, various researches have been carried out for the removal of cyanide using activated carbon The aim of this research is to focus on the removal of cyanide from aqueous solution at different pH range using Gölbaşı lignite based activated carbon and iron-impregnated coal based activated carbon as adsorbent materials and is to compare the results with commercial activated carbon. As carbonaceous raw material, Gölbaşı lignite, was selected to prepare coal based activated carbon and magnetic activated carbon due to its readily availability and low cost. Proven reserve of Gölbaşı lignite (Harmanlı field) is 51,325,000 Activated carbon was prepared using Gölbaşı – Adıyaman (Turkey) lignite which was chosen for the precursor due to its availability and low cost. Proximate and ultimate analyses of the air-dried lignite sample are given in The lignite sample (−60 The experimental procedure is based on the study conducted by Yang et al. In order to evaluate and give a better decision about the applicability of LAC and FeAC for removal of cyanide from aqueous solution, commercial activated carbon was used in the same experimental condition and the obtained results were compared to the results of LAC and FeAC. The commercial activated carbon, which is derived from coconut shell by physical activation, was supplied by Calgon Corporation (Calgon GRC 22). It was used in granular form (−7 Surface area, pore size distribution and pore volume of the activated carbons were measured from nitrogen adsorption isotherms at 77 Adsorption studies were conducted in routine manner by batch technique. First, the effect of pH on the cyanide adsorption on the activated carbon was investigated. Experiment was carried out at 500 In respect to the result of pH, all experiments were conducted at two different pH ranges, 7–7.5 and 10–10.5, respectively. Adsorption of cyanide onto activated carbons with respect to initial cyanide concentration was determined by equilibrating 1.5 The amount of cyanide In the present study, adsorption isotherms and kinetics studies were explained using linear least squares methods and non-linear method which were determined using the solver add-in with Microsoft's spreadsheet, Microsoft Excel. Average relative error (ARE) and nonlinear Chi-square test ( The N Surface area and porosity values of the activated carbons are presented in   The hysteresis loops of LAC and FeAC are given in The effect of pH of solution on cyanide adsorption is shown in In order to check the suggestion of Noroozifar et al. On the other hand, the adsorption of cyanide on CAC-1, CAC-2 and LAC showed the same trend and rose by increasing the pH of the solution. The p With respect to the above-mentioned information and also due to the pH values of 10–11 of gold cyanide disposals, in the present study, the adsorption isotherm parameters and kinetic data were determined at two different pH ranges (7–7.5 and 10–10.5). The effect of cyanide concentration onto adsorbents (CAC-1, CAC-2, LAC and FeAC) was investigated at two different pH ranges of 7–7.5 and 10–10.5 and their plots are illustrated in  Literature survey shows that the cyanide adsorption capacities of activated carbons increases with the impregnation of them with silver, copper, and nickel at high pH level The adsorption isotherm data were fitted with well-known two-parameter models, Langmuir The linearized isotherm parameters were calculated by applying the linear regression procedure and also non-linear isotherm parameters were determined using the solver add-in with Microsoft's spreadsheet, Microsoft Excel. The calculated parameters for two different pH range (7–7.5 and 10–10.5), the correlation coefficient and error functions were summarized in From Since Langmuir model is one of the best fitting isotherm models which is also applied in this study, ‘ The results of Redlich–Peterson isotherm also support the suitability of Langmuir model. This model is related with three parameters empirical equation and is a hybrid isotherm featuring both Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms Based on the adsorption capacities (Langmuir ( It was found that LAC and FeAC exhibited nearly same cyanide removal efficiency with the commercial activated carbons. In order to compare the adsorption capacities of LAC and FeAC, the adsorption capacities of some adsorbents for cyanide adsorption are given in The pseudo-first order kinetic model The kinetic linearized and non-linearized model studies were carried out at initial cyanide concentration of 100 In the present study, to understand the adsorption mechanism of cyanide on the activated carbons, intraparticle diffusion model was also applied for all conditions. Parameters which are obtained from the general equation of intraparticle diffusion model as a function of different initial cyanide concentrations at two different pH values (7–7.5 and 10–10.5) are given in In this study, a plain activated carbon and iron impregnated activated carbon were prepared from Gölbaşı lignite. BET surface area of LAC is determined as 921 Thanks are due to Askale Van Cement Factory for their contributions in performing experiments. Also special thanks to Dr. Yunus Onal for helping to carry out some extra experiments in the laboratory of Chemical Engineering in Inonu University after the earthquake in Van.