During the last few years, the self-similar particle size distribution for a particle population undergoing breakage in equal size fragments has been derived using approximating, numerical, and analytical means. But very recently it was shown [N.V. Mantzaris, J. Phys. A Math. Gen. 38 (2005) 5111] through transient simulation of the breakage process that the particle size distribution in case of breakage in two equal fragments, never attains a steady shape, i.e., a self-similar form. The new results give rise to questions about the real meaning and utility of the previously derived self-similar distributions for these systems. The scope of the present work is to answer these questions and it is attempted using only analytical (exact) means for the solution of the transient breakage problem. In doing so, the very interesting and rich underlying structure and properties of the solutions of the equal size breakage problem (seemingly, very simple) are revealed. It appears that the utility of the known self-similar distributions for this particular problem has to be redefined but yet not entirely abandoned.Breakage is a very important phenomenon which is of interest to many technological and scientific disciplines. For example, in industrial crystallization, breakage is one of the phenomena determining the crystal size distribution The breakage process is described in its simplest form by the linear breakage equation which is a linear integro-differential equation containing as parameters the breakage rate and breakage kernel functions. In the general case, the breakage equation must be solved numerically so many methods has been developed for this purpose. There are methods based on sectional representation of the particle size distribution (moving or fixed grid) The simplest mode of breakage is the binary equal-size breakage. Perhaps due to the simplicity of the corresponding breakage equation, the asymptotic behavior of this breakage mode has not been studied extensively until a few years ago. One special feature of the discrete breakage kernels is that a discrete initial distribution leads to a discrete PSD whereas a continuous initial distribution leads to a continuous PSD. In In order to give the answer to that question, no numerical codes are needed for the solution of the breakage equation with the particular kernel since a fully analytical solution is derived here (see Section The breakage process can be described in general by the following linear partial integro-differential equation: Let The function So considering the above breakage functions, the breakage equation takes the form: Let us assume that By inspection, it is assumed that the solution for The above table refers to The moments of the distribution for the case of a monodisperse initial condition are given as In order to generalize the above solution for the case of an arbitrary continuous initial distribution, a Green-like function The fragmentation equation The solution for the case of a general discrete initial distribution There are several variable transformations that can lead to a self-similar solution of Eq. An alternative variable transformation is given in the following. It is less physically meaningful, but is easier to use because the transformed equations are more compact and more readily handled analytically. The cumulative particle volume distribution is defined as The moments of the functions Using the tools described above (complete transient analytical solution and asymptotic self-similar distribution), the large time behavior of the solutions of Eq. It is very convenient to present the transient results with respect to the time-like variable Now the question is about the actual shape of the size distribution (in self-similar coordinates) that produces the above behavior of the dispersivity. It is expected that a monodisperse initial condition would lead to a discrete polydisperse PSD, but more information about this is needed. In  Next, the PSD behavior (dispersivity evolution and shape of the “attractor” curve) at the limit of very large Let us now try to derive in closed form the shape of the curve traced by An interesting question is how the total number of particles evolves in the real time domain. The dispersivity oscillations imply that the total particle number does not increase smoothly in time. However, such a behavior has never been registered by using numerical or approximating techniques; i.e., the computed total particle number always increases smoothly in time. The evolution of the total particle number for several values of The effect of the initial PSD to the large time PSD behavior is examined here, starting from the discrete PSDs. The first observation is that two discrete sizes with ratio equal to 2 contribute in the same way to the large-time PSD. Actually, the large-time behavior shown above for the case of monodisperse initial distribution is exactly the same with that of an initial polydisperse distribution with particle sizes proportional to A second observation regarding the monodisperse initial distribution is that the discreteness of the large-time PSD seems to prevent the establishment of a self-similar distribution. For small values of Regarding the shape of the PSD in self-similar coordinates for large times, it is assured that a steady shape is not reached even in cases of constant asymptotic dispersivity (i.e., small value of Mantzaris From the above it becomes evident that it is not the discreteness of the PSD that hinders the establishment of a steady asymptotic shape (self-similar distribution). But then, what is the meaning of the self-similar PSD equation According to the so far discussion, the self-similar solution is only of fundamental interest without any practical meaning since it is never reached. But this is not so because having the self-similar distribution as the initial one, the transient term is zero and remains so forever since the rest of the terms are fulfilled by the self-similar PSD. Hence, a PSD with the self-similar form retains its shape throughout the whole fragmentation process. In addition, the amplitude of the asymptotic oscillations depends on the difference between the initial distribution and the self-similar one. The closer is the initial distribution to the self-similar one, the smaller the amplitude of asymptotic oscillations. Next, it will be proved that the self-similar distribution given in Eq. The large-time behavior of a PSD for a particulate system undergoing binary equal-size breakage with a power-law breakage exponent is examined in this work. It is shown that despite the homogeneity of the breakage functions, a self-similar PSD is never established. Instead, at large time the PSD in transformed (self-similar) coordinates oscillates periodically with respect to transformed time. The oscillation pattern depends critically on the initial shape of the PSD. For the case of a discrete initial PSD, the large-time oscillating PSD is always discrete. In the particular case of a monodisperse initial PSD, the discrete particle sizes of the oscillating PSD form a particular curve during their motion. The shape of this curve depends only on the breakage rate exponent. For the case of a continuous initial PSD, the continuous asymptotic PSD also oscillates periodically. The amplitude of these oscillations decreases the closer is the shape of the actual initial PSD to the shape resulting from the self-similarity theory. For an initial distribution similar to the self-similar one the oscillations vanish and the PSD retains its shape as time proceeds. Only in this case, the distribution resulting from the self-similarity theory is the true asymptotic result of the breakage process.