Introduction
                  While there is a consensus that complex acetabular fractures require anatomical reduction and stable fixation for their management, there is no agreement on the surgical approaches to be used for achieving that goal. Invariably two surgical approaches are needed for management of such fractures. Whether these approaches should be performed in different anesthetic sittings or in the same sitting, sequentially or simultaneously, is debatable.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  41 patients with complex acetabular fractures were operated in floppy lateral position by combined anterior and posterior approaches during the same anesthetic sitting and were followed for a minimum of one year. Patient related parameters as well as the details of their clinical outcome assessed by Merle D′ Aubigne (MD’A) score, radiological outcome by Matta's method, Harris Hip score and complications encountered were recorded. Correlations of the clinical outcomes with other parameters were analyzed along with other statistical details.
               
                  Results
                  The mean surgical duration was 3.5 h. Anatomical reduction was achieved in 17 patients, congruent reduction in 19 and incongruent reduction in 5 patients. MD’A scores were excellent in 8 cases, good in 18 cases, fair in 5 cases and poor in 10 cases. Radiological outcome was excellent in 5, good in 16, fair in 13 and poor in 7 patients. Statistically significant correlation was noted between the MD’A score with reduction quality, cartilage damage and radiological outcome. Delay in surgery and choice of surgical approach had no correlation with the clinical outcome.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Combined approaches in the same anesthetic sitting can be used for satisfactory management of complex acetabular fractures. These offer the ease of assessing reduction during surgery, can potentially save time and expenses without unduly affecting the clinical and radiological outcomes and without increasing the rate of complications when compared to approaches performed sequentially.