Wasabi paste is very popular worldwide because of its unique aroma and taste, which is produced from wasabi powder. In the present work, wasabi was ball-milled for 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 min to obtain different particle size of powder, and the influence of ball milling time on the quality of wasabi paste was investigated. The product quality attributes such as color, water and isothiocyanate contents, chlorophyll content, rheology properties, flavor and sensory values were determined. Results shown that the best wasabi paste could be produced by ball-milling wasabi for 30 min yielding a particle size of 499.1 ± 36.1 nm, with the highest isothiocyanate, chlorophyll content and sensory scores as well as the best color properties. This work demonstrated that high quality wasabi paste could be produced by selecting proper ball milling time of the raw wasabi material to get proper particle size.Wasabi ( Isothiocyanate are organosulfur compounds and are the major flavor substances of cruciferous vegetables such as wasabi cabbage, horseradish and wasabi, which are commonly purchased by consumers. Isothiocyanate content is an important quality indicator of wasabi paste, but it is extremely volatile during processing and storage and may decrease to a very low level quickly. The release of isothiocyanate from broken cells is mediated by the mustard enzyme which exists in wasabi tissues and produces mustard from the hydrolysis of glucosinolates using water as a medium. Therefore, factors that influence the enzyme (mustard enzyme) activity of isothiocyanate formation and degradation should be carefully controlled to produce high quality wasabi paste with high isothiocyanate content. One of such factors is particle size of wasabi powder which affects the contact area of water and mustard enzyme thus influencing the final isothiocyanate content of wasabi paste. Size-reduction technologies such as: jet milling, balling milling and colloid milling, high pressure homogenization, ultrasonic homogenization and microfluidization are novel comminution methods which have attracted much attention in food industry for the ability to reduce the size of biological materials to micron or submicron scale After freeze drying of fresh wasabi, grinding is an indispensable step to make wasabi paste. Improper grinding methods may cause destruction to wasabi materials and result in low isothiocyanate content. Ball milling is a low-cost and environmentally friendly mechanical method to crush solid materials. It is a very quick food grinding method that can be operated at low temperature. This process is able to produce high-quality powder products as most of the food active compounds are preserved. It was reported that the antioxidant activity of Lycium barbarum polysaccharides were even enhanced after ball milling However, there is no systematic study that quantifies or provides insights into the effect of particle size of wasabi powder on the quality of wasabi paste of interest. By using ball milling method, the aim of this research was to investigate the effects of size reduction of wasabi powder on the nutritional and physicochemical characteristics of wasabi paste. This research may provide a practical reference about the processing conditions on the quality of wasabi paste. Fresh wasabi was purchased from Wasabi Plant Company (Lishan county, Yunnan province, China), which were washed, cut into slices (2 cm × 1 cm × 0.5 cm) and frozen at −70 °C before freeze drying. The wasabi slices freeze drying process was carried out as described by Qiu et al. The freeze-dried samples were pulverized using a grinder for 3 min. The process was stopped 10 s after every 30 s of grinding. The pulverized powder was recorded as control (0 min) and was collected for the process of ball milling. A high energy ball-milling system was used to ground the dried wasabi samples (Taiji ring nanometers Co., Ltd., Qinhuangdao, Hebei, China). The schematic diagram of the system is shown in Wasabi powders with different particle size obtained from different grinding time (0, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 min) were mixed with other ingredients according to the basic formula listed below to produce wasabi pastes. The wasabi pastes were kept in a thermostat water bath (70 °C) for 2 h to make isothiocyanate fully generated and then cooled using distilled water to room temperature (25 °C) according to the hydrolysis condition of glucosinolates in wasabi which was previously described by Qiu et al. The formula of wasabi paste was:wasabi powder (different particle size) 2 g, distilled water 4 g, salt 0.24 g, sorbitol 0.24 g, xanthan gum 0.06 g, soybean oil 0.4 g, wheat starch 0.4 g. The particle size was measured using a laser particle size analyzer (Microtrac Corporation, Montgomeryville, PA, USA) according to the method of Leverrier et al. for some modification The water content and distribution of wasabi paste were determined by the low-field nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) (Niumag Electric Corporation, Shanghai, China) through the transverse relaxation time T Piperidine titration was used to estimate the isothiocyanate content of wasabi paste A spectrophotometer (DR 2800; Hach Co., Loveland, CO, USA) was used to determine to the chlorophyll content of wasabi pastes according to the modified method which was previously described by Cao et al. The color of wasabi paste was measured using a chromometer (CR-400, Konica Minolat, Osaka, Japan) The rheological properties of wasabi paste were analysed using a rheometer (Discovery HR-2, DHR, TA Instruments), equipped with parallel plate geometry (C35 2°Ti L, PP35Ti and 1 mm gap) The volatile compounds of wasabi paste were determined by an electronic nose (iNose102, Isenso, USA). Fourteen different sensors which react to different odour composition are shown in The taste substance of wasabi paste was detected by an electronic tone (TS-5000Z, INSENT, Japan). Before measurement, eight taste sensors were sensor checked to ensure the stability of the machine. About 1 g wasabi paste was placed into 100 mL distilled water for 10 min and then filtered. The supernatant was put into taste cups (diameter and height were 30 mm and 35 mm respectively) for the test. The sensory evaluation was carried out by nine trained and experienced panelists. The quality properties of wasabi paste (appearance, odour, taste and overall acceptability) were evaluated. A nine-point hedonic scale ( Unless specified, each analysis was carried out for three times. The results were expressed as mean value ± standard deviation (SD). Data analysis were carried out by SPSS software 17.0 (IBM, Chicago, IL, USA). Difference of The average particle size and polydispersity index of wasabi powder ball milled for different times are shown in  Isothiocyanate content is an essential index to estimate the quality of wasabi paste. As can be seen from Chlorophyll content is an indicator of the greenness of wasabi paste. It can be obviously observed from Color is another significant index of wasabi paste, and green is the preferred color for this product. The color profiles of wasabi paste with different particle size are shown in The change of lightness ( Apparent viscosity, elastic modulus storage modulus (G’) and loss modulus (G’’) play important roles for the semi-solid food products like wasabi paste, because these properties influence the product structure and textures. The flow behaviors of the wasabi pastes are presented in Storage modulus (G’) is a measure of the elastic solid-like behavior i.e., resistance to deform elastically, while the loss modulus (G’’) is the ratio of stress to strain under vibratory conditions. All the tested wasabi paste samples were characterized by G’>G’’. It can be seen from Generally, an electronic nose is an array of odor sensors. It distinguishes the simple and complex odors by simulating the nose of living beings  Electronic tongue analysis was used for the evaluation of the wasabi paste taste. It is consisted of the types and concentrations of taste substances  After ball milling, all the wasabi powders can be regarded as superfine food powder because the particle size was far below 10 m. Ball milling time resulted in different particle size powders thus influencing the quality of the wasabi paste. Duration of ball milling did affect the quality of wasabi paste (color parameters, rheological properties, isothiocyanate content, chlorophyll content, flavor, taste and sensory scores) produced using wasabi powder. Wasabi paste with the greenest color and the highest isothiocyanate content and sensory scores were achieved by ball milling for 30 min. The results suggest that wasabi paste with the best quality can be produced by carefully selecting the particle size of wasabi powder. Overall 30 min ball milling time of wasabi was the most suitable condition for producing wasabi paste. This work was financially supported by