Groundwater contaminant plumes often display a curvilinear anisotropy which conventional kriging and geostatistical simulation approaches generally fail to reproduce. In this paper, we use a physically relevant coordinate transformation in order to improve the kriging of contaminant plumes in 2D. The proposed coordinate transformation maps the Cartesian grid into the natural coordinates of flow: the hydraulic head and the stream function. This simplifies the specification of a nonlinear anisotropy by modifying the spatial relationships between grid points. The computation of the natural coordinates, however, requires the availability of a flow model, which often needs to be defined using limited data. For this reason, a data integration procedure is included in the methodology to support the use of the natural coordinate transformation in real cases. The performance of the approach is tested on two synthetic test cases where it produces concentration maps that are more accurate than those obtained with Cartesian coordinates kriging. These test cases also highlight some limitations of the approach. Whereas the transformation enables kriging to account for advection, results show the need to consider dispersion as well. Further work is also required to generalize the approach to 3D cases and to groundwater flow including wells and sources.Contaminant plume mapping is an important part of environmental characterization studies involving groundwater contamination. It is frequently used for tasks related to numerical fate-and-transport modeling, long-term monitoring network design and groundwater remediation ( Currently, plumes can be delineated using a large number of approaches, ranging from manual contouring of concentration data to inverse approaches combined with transport modeling. Hand drawing of concentration contours for plume mapping is rather simple to implement, especially in the case where only wide concentration intervals are required. However, this approach is subjective, as it is based on expert knowledge of the hydrogeological system. Allowing delineated plumes to be coherent with mass transport equations requires advanced approaches involving the use of inverse modeling ( Deterministic (e.g. inverse-distance weighting) and geostatistical (e.g. kriging) interpolation methods make direct use of concentration measurements to produce concentration maps. Kriging, through its variants and extensions, allows the use of secondary information ( Multiple-point geostatistics can produce simulated hydraulic conductivity fields for complex geological settings that include curvilinear features, provided a representative training image is available. Such multiple-point approaches, combined with groundwater flow and transport models, can be used to assess the uncertainty related to contaminant concentrations ( In this paper, we present an approach that accounts for the nonlinear anisotropy often displayed by contaminant plume to enhance groundwater contaminant kriging in 2D. It is based on a coordinate transformation that maps the Cartesian coordinates into the natural flow coordinates i.e. the hydraulic head and the stream function ( When governed by Laplace equation, two-dimensional groundwater flow can be described simultaneously using hydraulic head Proper specification of boundary conditions for the stream function problem in the context of finite element modeling is discussed by Further applications of the dual formulation stem from the fact that it can be used to define a streamline-oriented grid ( Kriging approaches can also benefit from the dual formulation of flow. Whereas the curvilinearity shown by a contaminant plume could also be accounted for using a locally varying anisotropy in the actual space, a coordinate transformation based on the dual formulation simplifies the specification of anisotropy in the transformed space. The transformation into natural coordinates requires the availability of a flow model to compute the hydraulic head and the stream function at every grid point. In a real case, this has to be estimated from a generally limited amount of data. This section present a data integration procedure that aims at combining hydraulic head measurements and various information sources, such as geological model, boundary conditions and hydraulic properties, in order to produce a flow model for the computation of natural coordinates that are representative of the data at hand. The procedure combines hydraulic head kriging and inverse modeling to generate calibrated hydraulic head and stream function fields. Conceptual flow model information, through the corresponding numerical solution, can be readily used for hydraulic head interpolation using the kriging with an external drift (KED) approach of Thus, the first step of the data integration procedure is to yield a kriged hydraulic head map, which displays both characteristics of the head measurements and of the conceptual flow model. Obviously, such direct interpolation is not possible for the estimation of the stream function as it is not a measurable quantity. The stream function, however, can be calculated using a flow simulator, provided reliable hydraulic conductivity ( The inverse modeling step surely adds to the complexity of the proposed methodology; however, the SFE algorithm is fast compared to other types of inverse modeling algorithms ( Following the inverse modeling step, For this kriging step, no secondary information is considered and, for this reason, ordinary kriging (OK) is used. Therefore, the difference with the usual OK procedure is that the Euclidean distances used to compute the covariance are defined in the estimated natural flow coordinates space. As the test cases presented below investigate the capacity of the approach in a sparse data context, the concentration covariance model is chosen without computing the experimental variogram. In general, variography should be performed on the concentration data, keeping in mind that limited measurements and/or preferential sampling can lead to flawed variogram estimation ( Synthetic case studies allow direct comparison with the reference model and thus errors can be computed. This section presents the different error statistics used to investigate the performance of the proposed approach. These quantities will be used to compare the natural coordinate kriging (NCK) approach to the conventional Cartesian coordinates kriging (CCK). The precision of the kriged concentration maps, is evaluated by direct comparison between the reference and estimated maps. For this, we use the fact that the approach is finite-element based. Kriged and “real” concentrations are interpolated at the center of each element using the finite element basis functions. We compute the mean absolute error (MAE) using: One purpose of contaminant plume mapping is the delineation of the area above a threshold concentration, such as a maximum concentration limit (MCL), usually defined by environmental regulations for a given contaminant. To further assess the capability of NCK over CCK, we compute, for a given threshold, the error between the estimated and the reference contaminated area. In each case, an indicator variable is used to classify which elements are above the threshold. The contaminated areas are computed by: the concentration is correctly estimated as under the threshold (true negative), the concentration is incorrectly estimated as above the threshold (false positive), the concentration is incorrectly estimated as under the threshold (false negative), the concentration is correctly estimated as above the threshold (true positive). Several preformance measures arise from the confusion table. A standard performance measure is Accuracy represents the proportion of the study area where the concentrations are correctly estimated with respect to a given threshold Another quantity used for performance assessment is the relative absolute error on the contaminant mass per length (aquifer depth or width). For each concentration map, the mass per unit aquifer length is computed using: The model is a 100 Three sampling patterns and data availability scenarios are considered: 25 data points at random locations, 18 data points on a regular grid, 8 data points on a regular grid.  Despite these good results, some problematic features are found on the NCK maps. In the eight data points scenario ( Of course, full knowledge of the flow is not conceivable in a practical situation. However, the case presented here, admittedly disadvantageous for conventional CCK, has the benefit of clearly showing the potential of using the transformation in natural coordinates, as well as some of its potential shortcomings.  In the present test case, the hydraulic head and stream function are not known and have to be estimated using the combined kriging and inverse modeling approach described previously. Two scenarios are tested, corresponding to different geological interpretations and/or data availability for the definition of the conceptual model used as auxiliary information in the kriging of These two conceptual models are used twice in the process; first their corresponding numerical solution is used as an auxiliary variable for the kriging step used to integrate  Conventional kriging on Cartesian coordinates yields the map shown in  Quantitative assessment reflects the improvement observed on the maps. MAE and relative error for the estimated mass ( Results from the first test case show that, even with limited observations, the coordinate transform greatly enhances the interpolation of concentrations as the anisotropy of the phenomenon is better accounted for. Although groundwater flow is seldom known in as much details as assumed in that test case, results still provide an insight into the capacity of the natural coordinate transformation to capture the plume complex anisotropy. This test case also highlights potential shortcomings related to the transformation. Depending on the location of the data, spurious spreading of concentrations can occur in areas with low stream function or hydraulic head gradients as seen on In the second test case, the natural coordinates were estimated using the data integration procedure (Section Several limitations hinder the application of this approach to more general cases. Using the stream function in the approach restricts its use to cases governed by Laplace equation and thus, it cannot be used in the presence of wells or sources, unless they can be incorporated to the domain boundaries. A way to overturn this could be to identify dividing streamlines using an approach similar to One key aspect of the approach is that no assumption on the release history needs to be made, as would be the case if producing a contaminant map from the flow model estimated in the inverse modeling step. Results depend on the observed concentrations data and the estimated flow field. They are not affected by some mispecification of boundary conditions on the conceptual model which would lead to increased or decreased flow velocities, but a similar flownet. On the other hand, this would impact a concentration map obtained at a given time using numerical transport modeling, not considering the fact that concentrations measurements cannot be directly used in such case. In a context where the goal is the interpolation of concentration measurements at a given time, the proposed methodology enables the integration of sparse data and secondary information. NCK produces contaminant maps that can be used as initial solutions for numerical fate-and-transport modeling or as a calibration or validation target for such numerical models. The approach can also be modified to incorporate hydraulic head field simulations in which the impact of the uncertainty related to the flow field on the concentrations maps could be assessed. This study investigated the use of coordinate transformation based on groundwater flow for the kriging of groundwater contaminant concentrations. This transformation enables kriging to account for the nonlinear direction of anisotropy displayed by some contaminant plumes. The proposed methodology can serve as a basis for the integration of sparse flow and transport data and to incorporate secondary information (flow) into the interpolation of concentrations, a feature generally lacking in conventional interpolation approaches. In the test cases presented here, concentration maps produced using NCK are more accurate and representative than those obtained with Cartesian coordinates kriging. However, the fact that the transformation does not provide means to account for transverse dispersion seems to have had an effect on the performance of the approach, suggesting more could be gained from further improvements. Further work is required to adapt the approach to more general cases. Streamline-based coordinate transformation in 3D is the subject of ongoing research. Financial support for this research was provided by a scholarship from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). The authors thank René Lefebvre for helpful comments and suggestions.