Many models have been developed to predict size-dependent melting temperature of nanoparticles. A new model based on the cluster mean coordination number (MCN) calculations is developed in this work. Results of the model for Al, Au, Pb, Ag, Cu, In, Sn, and Bi were compared with other models and experiments. The comparison indicated that the MCN model is in good agreement with available experimental values. It is also found that the melting temperature is more dependent on particle size as the atomic radius increased.Nanomaterials are experiencing rapid development in recent years due to their known and/or potential applications in areas such as electronics, catalysis, ceramics, magnetic data storage, structural components, etc. Nanomaterials can be classified into nanocrystalline materials and nanoparticles. The former are polycrystalline bulk materials with grain sizes in the nanometer range, while the latter refers to ultrafine dispersive particles with diameters below 100 models developed in terms of classical thermodynamics and surface energy models based on molecular thermodynamics and atomic mean square displacement (msd) models established on cohesive energy calculations of particles Liquid-drop model developed by Nanda et al. Xie et al. In this work, a new concept of particle mean coordination number (MCN) will be introduced and a new model (MCN model) will be developed to calculate melting temperature of nanoparticles with free surfaces. With the use of MCN calculations more precise cohesive energy will be obtained for nanoparticles. According to the relation between melting temperature and cohesive energy, an expression for the size-dependent melting temperature of nanoparticles will be developed. To confirm the efficiency of our new model, predictions for Al, Au, Pb, Ag, Cu, In, Sn, and Bi nanoparticles will be compared with the available experimental values and other theoretical models. One of the most critical characteristics of nanoparticles is their very high surface-to-volume ratio, i.e. large fractions of surface atoms. When the concentration of building blocks (atoms or ions) of a solid becomes sufficiently high, they aggregate into small clusters through homogeneous nucleation. With continuous supply of the building blocks, these clusters tend to coalesce and grow to form a larger cluster assembly. Clusters are structures with a central site around which the cluster is grown. The cluster may be considered as an onion-like structure (non-spherical) formed by several concentric shells around the central site. All the surface sites, which may belong to various shells, are defined as crusts. The number of crusts, For most transition metal nanoparticles these distinct structures can occur, which are not characteristics of the bulk crystal structure. Clusters with a small number of atoms (<150–200) crystallize in the form of ico. The structure becomes unstable for a large number of atoms and transforms to co, which is just a patch of the face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice The number of sites in a crust increases with the order, It is well known that both the cohesive energy and the melting temperature are parameters to describe the bond strength of materials. It is reported that the cohesive energy and melting temperature may have some proportional relations In the same way, molar cohesive energy of nanoparticles atoms can be written as Considering In the same way, for an ico cluster we have As mentioned, ico structure is not stable for a large number of atoms and transforms to co. Therefore the most proper equation that could be used for close-packed materials is the one that corresponds to co clusters: As shown in Ignoring the effect of curvature and surface relaxation, the above equation can be used for spherical close-packed nanoparticles with radius The main advantage of MCN model is that there is no need to know surface energies and other thermodynamic information. In our model only atomic radius and bulk melting temperature are needed for calculating nanoparticles melting point. Size-dependant melting temperatures of Al, Au, Pb, Ag, Cu, In, Sn, and Bi nanoparticles are shown in It seems metallic clusters are generally formed in co structures and they then transform into their bulk crystal structures as their sizes grow. Therefore Eq. It is worth noting that according to MCN model (Eq. In this work, a new model based on mean coordination number (MCN model) calculations was developed for predicting size-dependent melting point of nanoparticles. The model results for Al, Au, Pb, Ag, Cu, In, Sn, and Bi nanoparticles show the efficiency of this model in comparison with other models. According to MCN model it was found that for elements with the same crystal structure, size dependency of melting temperature increases with atomic radius. Considering the importance of the melting temperature of nanosolids, we are confident that the method presented in this paper may have potential application in the research on temperature-dependent properties of nanosolids. We are grateful to T. Dallali-Isfahani, H. Amel-Farzad, and S. Raouf for useful discussions and helps.