Marble specimens were used to investigate the effects of freezing and thermal cyclic loading on crack initiation and propagation and fracture modes. To this end, four loading types of freezing-cooling (F-C), heating-cooling (H-C), freezing-cooling- heating (F-C-H) and heating-cooling-saturating-freezing (H-C-F (sat.)) were considered. Forty-four toughness tests were carried out, and changes in the fracture mechanism in the marble were analyzed at −30 °C and 160 °C. The fracture toughness parameters, load-displacement curves, crack initiation angle for mode II and the mixed mode (I-II) were measured and then predicted using the conventional criteria. Crack initiation angles for the mixed mode (I-II) and mode II fracture toughness in different loading conditions were calculated to be about 58° and 78°, respectively. The F-C-H loading condition seemed to reduce mode I fracture toughness in the tested samples. The experimental data on fracture toughness for H-C, F-C-H and H-C-F (sat.) loading conditions were well predicted by the modified maximum tangential stress (MMTS), maximum tangential stress (MTS) and G-criterion. The results indicated that very good predictions are obtained by the extended maximum tangential strain (EMTSN) for the fracture toughness of marble envelopes in the entire range of mode mixities from pure mode I to pure mode II. Load-displacement curves for different loading conditions were monitored, indicating that the peak load significantly decreased for F-C-H and H-C-F (sat.) cycles.Fracture mechanics are appropriate tools for studying crack initiation and propagation and fracture modes for safe design in geomechanics projects. They have numerous applications in rock mechanics and rock engineering, including the analysis of rock burst, rock fragmentation due to blasting, hydraulic fracturing, geothermal reservoir, and slope stability Funatsu et al. (2014) investigated the effect of temperature and confining pressure on fracture modes of sandstone. The results showed that fracture toughness decreased at temperatures between room temperature and 75 °C and increased at temperatures from 100 °C to 200 °C due to clay dehydration Mahanta et al. (2016) showed that mode I fracture toughness of three types of sandstone increased at temperatures up to 100 °C and decreased at temperatures between 100 °C and 600 °C Zuo et al. (2014) investigated the behavior of mode I siltstone and categorized it into 3 groups: 1) decrease in mode I fracture toughness (K Kim et al. (2013) investigated the effects of rapid thermal cooling on various rock specimens. In effect, different modes of heating up to 300 °C were applied, followed by rapid cooling with a fan. The results evidenced a significant increase in mode I after 20 cycles Heidary-ranani et al. (2014) assessed the effect of three types of thermal cycles (i.e., 25 °C to −30 °C (cycle A), 25 °C to 70 °C (cycle B) and −30 °C to 70 °C (cycle C)) on mode I fracture toughness of polymer concrete for 7 days. According to the results of the study, cycle B had the greatest effect on mode I Erarslan (2016) conducted an experimental study on the behavior of fracture toughness and the fracture process zone (FPZ) of tuff specimens under static and cyclic loadings. He reported that subcritical crack propagation occurred during cyclic loading. In other words, in the absence of chemicals or high temperatures, fracture toughness diminished during cyclic loading, compared to static loading, from 1.23 to 0.61 MPa.m Alneasan et al. (2018) predicted crack initiation and propagation under compressive loading. The results of the study showed that the crack initiation angle was highly dependent on the friction coefficient for the closed crack state Yin et al. (2012) evaluated mode I dynamic fracture toughness of granite at various loading rates and temperatures (25 °C–850 °C). They showed that the loading rate and temperature have positive and negative impacts on mode I, respectively. Effectively, decrease in fracture toughness was greater at higher temperatures (450 °C–850 °C) due to α-β quartz phase transition Aliha et al. (2017) introduced the average strain energy density (ASED) criterion to predict the mixed mode fracture toughness of white marble. They concluded that the fracture loads data on white marble were in good agreement with the ASED criterion in all fracture toughness mode Razavi et al. (2017) predicted fracture loads of granite specimens based on the ASED criterion. The results showed that the ASED criterion predicted fracture loads of not only such materials as metals, polymers and graphite but also rock materials Mirsayar et al. (2016) estimated mixed mode fracture toughness of polycrystalline graphite based on two strain-based fracture criteria, namely the conventional maximum tangential strain (MTSN) criterion and the extended maximum tangential strain (EMTSN) criteria. They concluded that experimental data on fracture toughness were more consistent with the predicted fracture toughness data obtained based on the EMTSN criterion than those obtained based on the MTSN criterion Mirsayar and Park (2016) assessed crack propagation of cement mortar based on the EMTSN criterion. The results showed that the first non-singular term (T-strain) had a significant effect on crack propagation of cement mortar Mirsayar et al. (2017) demonstrated that, among the MTS, MTSN and the EMTSN criteria, the EMTSN criterion could predict both mixed mode fracture toughness and crack propagation direction of marble specimens Mirsayar et al. (2017) indicated that the conventional fracture criteria (i.e., the MTS and strain energy density (SED) criteria), were unable to estimate mixed mode fracture toughness of cement concrete, while the EMTSN criterion was better correlated with the experimental data The majority of the previous research has focused on fracture toughness at various temperatures or in repeated cycles with similar timing and at a constant temperature. There is a lack of research on the effect of crack tip microcracks induced by different freezing and thermal cyclic loadings on crack growth angle. Consequently, in this study, first, toughness test specimens were prepared from marble rock. Then, four types of freezing and thermal cyclic loadings with different timings were applied at the constant temperature. Some untreated specimens were also considered. Scanning Electron Microscope images were obtained, and optical microscope observations and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) tests were conducted to obtain comprehensive data on mechanisms contributing to material behavior. Then, mode I, mix mode I-II and mode II fracture toughness, crack initiation and propagation direction at different freezing and thermal cyclic loadings were measured. Moreover, the experimental results were compared with the conventional fracture criteria. Finally, the fracture toughness of the marble subjected to freezing and thermal cyclic loading was predicted based on T-stress/strain effects. The three most common fracture criteria in terms of practical applications used to predict crack initiation and direction are as follows: 1) maximum tangential stress (MTS criterion, Erdogan & Sih, 1963) According to the S-criterion, the direction in which strain energy density is minimum can be obtained using Eq. Smith et al. (2001) modified the MTS criterion by adding the non-singular stress term Mirsayar (2015) introduced the extended maximum tangential strain (EMTSN) criterion. According to this criterion, a crack propagates when tangential strain reaches its maximum value. Two parameters including first non-singular strain term ( In fact, the EMTSN criterion is the modified version of the MTSN criterion, where the Many other researchers have proposed the following empirical criterion There are several fracture toughness tests such as the short rod (SR) test, the chevron-bend (CB) test, and the cracked chevron notched Brazilian disk (CCNBD) test To analyze fracture toughness, a marble block with the dimension of 30 × 30 × 30 cm In this study, freezing and thermal cyclic loading procedures were categorized into 4 groups: 1) freezing-cooling cycles (F-C), where specimens were placed in a freezer with the temperature of −30 °C and then exposed to room temperature to cool slowly, 2) heating-cooling cycles (H-C), where specimens were heated in an oven with the temperature of 160 °C, and at the heating rate of 2 °C/min and then exposed to room temperature to cool slowly, 3) freezing-cooling-heating cycles (F-C-H), where specimens were frozen at −30 °C and placed in an oven with the temperature of 160 °C after reaching the steady state at room temperature, and 4) heating-cooling-saturating-freezing (H-C-F (sat.)) cycles, where specimens were heated up to 160 °C, gradually cooled down to room temperature, saturated with water and frozen at −30 °C. There were 6 cycles with the timings of 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 24 h. Mode I, mixed mode I-II and mode II fracture toughness were determined by the SCB method to account for three different fracturing directions. Three-point bending tests were conducted on the prepared semi-circular-shaped specimens. At least three tests were conducted for each fracturing direction, and the average value was recorded as the peak load. To investigate the behavior of the specimens during the bending tests, the load-displacement diagram was plotted.  In contrast to the curves of the untreated specimens, F-C and H-C, significant changes were observed in the behavior of the loading curves of F-C-H and H-C-F (Sat.), indicating the extent of the fracture process zone around the crack tip. These two types of freezing and thermal cyclic loading, compared to the first condition, had a significant load loss (almost 60%). Hence, it was important to calculate mode II and mixed mode I-II fracture toughness. As shown in these figures, significant changes appeared at the peak load level, for untreated specimens (F-C, H-C, F-C-H and H-C-F (Sat.) cycles). Therefore, there were no significant changes in the behavior of curves in different loading conditions with different fracture angles. While load did not change significantly in the untreated specimens, compared to F-C cycles, it decreased 12% and 18% for the mixed mode and mode II in F-C cycles, respectively. Load decreased around 40% for the mixed mode at all freezing and thermal cyclic loadings, except for the untreated specimens and F-C cycles. While the decrease in load for H-C and F-C-H cycles remained about 50% in mode II, load decreased 57% for H-C-F (Sat.) cycles. Except for F-C cycles (  To compare the experimental data with theoretically relations, 44 fracture toughness tests were conducted on the treated and untreated specimens. The predictions by the conventional and MMTS fracture criteria and also the predictions by the EMTSN fracture criterion for the Poisson' ratio of 0.2 are depicted in As the result of the transition from elastic to elastic-plastic behavior and the formation of the fracture process zone indicated, the trend in the experimental data was similar to the G-criterion curve for H-C, F-C-H and H-C-F (Sat.) cycles, as shown in The value of To determine the composition of the marble rock under different cyclic loading conditions, XRD tests were conducted on the specimens at room temperature, and under F-C and H-C cycles (see Royer (1999) investigated the effect of thermal damage on marble monuments. He concluded that tensions induced by bending in the wide portion of grains led to intragranular microcracks. Two grain arrangement types of homoblastic and xenoblastic were introduced. The former is concerned with regular-shaped grains, and the latter is related to interlacing irregular crystals. Granular decohesion was more probable in homoblastic marble than in xenoblastic marble. Friction coefficient decreased due to smoothing grains borders In this study, Scanning Electron Microscope and Optical Microscope techniques were applied to evaluate the damage caused in the specimens by the freezing and thermal cyclic loading. In fact, the increase in the volume of grains caused by thermal expansion and temperature variations induces tensile stresses which affect grain border more than the grains themselves  This study investigated fracture properties and behavior of a mono-crystal marble rock under different freezing and thermal cyclic loading conditions. Some of the results are as follows: Four loading types of freezing-cooling (F-C), heating-cooling (H-C), freezing-cooling- heating (F-C-H) and heating-cooling-saturating-freezing (H-C-F (sat.)) as a new experimental loading condition were applied. Changes in mode I, mixed mode I-II and mode II fracture toughness were quite different. Effectively, the significant changes in mode I fracture toughness begun after F-C cycles, and there were significant changes in mixed mode I-II and mode II fracture toughness under H-C cycles. The increase in mode I fracture toughness under H-C-F (Sat.) cycles, compared to F-C-H cycles, can be attributed to the array of microcracks and the blunting effect. Load-displacement curves for different loading conditions were monitored and compared. The results indicated that peak load decreased significantly for F-C-H and H-C-F (sat.) cycles. In addition, the behavior of load-displacement curves associated with mode I fracture toughness changed completely. The trend in the experimental data for untreated specimens and F-C cycles was rather in agreement with the MMTS criterion. However, there was a transition in the trend for H-C, F-C-H and H-C-F (sat.) cycles from the MMTS criterion to the Modified fracture toughness criteria which take into account the non-singular stress/strain The parameters of fracture toughness, load-displacement curves, crack initiation angle for mode II and the mixed mode (I-II) were measured and compared with different loading conditions. It seems that microcracks had no effect on the crack initiation angle and the crack propagation path in all freezing and thermal cyclic loading conditions. In effect, the crack initiation angle for mode II and mixed mode fracture toughness was around 78° and 58°, respectively, somehow similar to the theoretically-estimated crack initiation angle. In addition, the crack initiation angle and the crack propagation path in this kind of rock were material-independent. Moreover, the crack propagation path for mixed mode (I-II) and mode II fracture toughness in various freezing and thermal cyclic loading conditions seemed to initiate at the crack tip and move in the loading direction. According to the results, the test data can surprisingly be predicted well by the conventional criteria because of the significant The EMTSN criterion was able to well estimate the fracture toughness trend. Very accurate EMTSN predictions were obtained for the fracture toughness envelopes of the marble in the entire range of mode mixities from pure mode I to pure mode II. Moreover, the EMTSN and MTS criteria provide lower and higher predictions of the fracture toughness for marble, respectively. None. We wish to express our heartfelt thanks to Consulting Engineers of Azmouneh Foulad Co. for their kind support. We also express our sincere appreciation to Mr. Mandegari an expert at the mechanical properties laboratory at the department of mechanical engineering for his help to this study. We are also appreciative to Dr. Rahimi, from ELC, IUT, for editing the manuscript.