The present investigation deals with the synthesis of nanocrystalline titanium powders by the high energy attrition milling of micron sized titanium powder in an inert atmosphere. Titanium powders of about 12 μm particle size were subjected to high energy attrition milling in an argon atmosphere. Selecting suitable milling parameters, nanosize (<100 nm) titanium powders were obtained after 15 h of milling. An average particle size of 35 nm was obtained at 30 h of milling after which the particle size stabilized with continuation of milling to 75 h. The powders after milling for various durations were characterized by XRD, SEM, TEM, ICP-AES and DTA and these results are reported and discussed.Titanium is a technologically important metal as it exhibits unique properties such as low density, good corrosion resistance and mechanical properties at room and moderately elevated temperatures. Due to these properties titanium has found numerous applications in the aerospace industry, chemical processing industry, medical engineering, automotive industry, food industry, etc. In recent years there have been considerable efforts to produce titanium alloys/composite powders by mechanical milling/alloying Although there are several reports on synthesis of titanium intermetallics Nanosized Ti powder was synthesized on a laboratory scale by attrition milling of micron sized Ti powder under high purity argon flow. The micron sized Ti powder (M/S Alfa Aesar, Germany) of average particle size of 12 μm was charged into stainless steel attritor. High purity argon gas (BOC Mumbai, India, Impurities: O The stearic acid added as process control agent (PCA) in the powder during attrition milling was removed by heating the powder in batches of 10 g in a vacuum furnace ( < After the PCA removal, the milled powders were characterized by X-ray diffractometry (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES), and differential thermal analysis (DTA). The XRD analysis of the powders was carried out using a Philips X-pert pro XRD with X'celerator instrument with a Cu target. The crystallite size of the powder particles was calculated from the line broadening using the Scherrer's formula, after correcting the contribution from lattice stress and instrumental effects. The contribution to peak broadening from lattice stress was removed by annealing (stress relief annealing) the powders in high purity Ar atmosphere at 450 °C for 2 h. The 450 °C annealing temperature was chosen as it was slightly below the recrystallization temperature of the milled powders which was between 475 and 525 °C. Based on a separate unpublished study the recrystallization temperature of the powders milled for 15–75 h was between 475 and 525 °C while the grain growth commencement temperature was between 675 and 750 °C. A slight drop in the crystallite size indicated the recrystallization temperature while a sudden increase indicated the commencement of grain growth. It should be noted that the milled powders were highly cold worked due to the milling process. The contribution to peak broadening from instrumental effects was removed by subtracting the broadening obtained from a titanium ingot annealed at 1300 °C in high purity Ar atmosphere for 4 h. The titanium ingot after annealing was polished and slightly etched to relive the surface stresses induced due to polishing. The expression A Philips (CM 200) TEM was used to determine the particle size of the milled powders. The milled powders were ultrasonically agitated in a propanol solution for 15 min before dispersion on the copper grid. This was done to reduce/eliminate the agglomeration in the powders. The particle size of over 100 particles was determined individually from the TEM and their average was taken as the average particle size. The particle size was determined using line bars on the TEM image screen. DTA was carried out in a Du pont instrument (9900 model) using α-alumina as the reference while the TG was carried out in a Shimadzu thermal analyzer (DT-40). Both DTA and TG were carried out employing a heating rate of 10 °C/min in high purity Ar atmosphere which prior to introduction in the furnace was passed through a getter furnace with Ti turnings to remove the traces of oxygen. This was done as titanium has a great affinity for oxygen above 600 °C. A Plasmalab (Labtam Ltd) made ICP-AES instrument was used to determine the impurity content in the powders. The powders were dissolved in a HF solution which was then neutralized using boric acid to avoid the reactivity of HF with the glass parts of the ICP-AES instrument. The detectable limit of the instrument was ≥ SEM studies were carried out using a FEIE instrument (model 200 HV Quanta). The as-milled powders were placed on a brass sample holder using a brush and gold sputtered to increase the conductivity. As determination of the particle morphology (due to welding, fracturing and rewelding) and level of agglomeration in the powders was required, dispersion of the powders was avoided. The X-ray diffraction patterns for the 5, 30 and 75 h milled powders along with the initial Ti powder (micron Ti) are shown in  ICP-AES indicated the presence of Fe, Cr, Ni, and Mn as the major impurities in the milled powders.  DTA results of initial titanium powder, 30 h milled, and 75 h milled powders are shown in The 30 h milled and 75 h milled powder exhibited a α Using the present milling parameters, nanosized Ti powder was obtained between 15 and 30 h of milling. The particle size was found to decrease rapidly with milling time till 30 h of milling after which the particle size got stabilized. X-ray diffraction of the milled powders revealed major peaks of titanium and minor peaks of titanium oxides. The intensity of the oxide peaks was found to increase with milling time. The crystallite size of the powders measured from X-ray line broadening was also found to stabilize after 30 h of milling and was of the order of 8–11 nm for powders milled for 30–75 h. Impurity pickup of Fe, Cr, Ni, and Mn was observed in the milled powders, the amount of which increased with milling time. The α–β transition temperature of titanium was found to decrease with milling time, which was most likely due to the impurity pickup.