The species on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface at pH 3.0, 6.5 and 11 were studied by principal component analysis (PCA) assisted time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), zeta potential and Eh-pH diagram analysis. The interaction mechanism between lead ions and marmatite surface was also discussed. The results showed that Pb-O-Zn/Pb-O-Fe containing species and Pb-S containing species were major and minor lead-containing species on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface at pH 3 and pH 6.5, respectively, while those at pH 11 were lead oxides/hydroxides and Pb-O-Zn/Pb-O-Fe containing species, respectively. The form of sulfur-containing species and oxygen-containing species on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface is strongly pH-dependent. These results help to address the long-standing controversy regarding the products and mechanisms of lead ions adsorption on marmatite surface.Since X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) are the two complementary techniques of surface analysis. Quantification of XPS data is easy and straightforward; however, the ability of XPS to distinguish different compounds is limited by energy resolution ( In this study, ToF-SIMS, XPS, zeta potential and Eh-pH diagram analysis were used to characterize lead-adsorbed marmatite at different pH conditions. The aim is to examine in detail the chemical composition of the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface. PCA was applied to analyze ToF-SIMS spectra datasets to identify species formed on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface and establish correlations between species and samples. Natural marmatite was obtained from Qinghai Province in China. The pure marmatite crystals were manually selected and ground using a three-head grinder with agate mortar and pestle (XPM-Φ120 × 3, china). After that, the fractions of −74 + 38 μm and −38 μm for marmatite were obtained by dry screened, respectively. The fractions of −74 + 38 μm samples were ultrasonically cleaned for 5 min each in Milli-Q water, ethanol and Milli-Q water. Finally, the cleaned samples were vacuum dried and sealed in a spiral glass bottle. Chemical titration showed that marmatite contained Zn 52.77 wt% and Fe 11.89 wt%, and flame atomic absorption spectrometry showed that marmatite contained Pb 0.09 wt%. Milli-Q water (Millipore deionized, 18.2 MΩ cm) was used throughout the experiments. The pH values were adjusted using HCl (36%−38%, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd) and NaOH (96%, Xilong Scientific). Pb(NO First, 1 g marmatite (−74 + 38 μm) was conditioned in 19.5 mL acidic solution of pH 3 or Milli-Q water of pH 6.5 or alkaline solution of pH 11 for 2 min. Second, 0.5 mL 4 × 10 ToF-SIMS data were obtained with a ToF-SIMS V (ION-TOF GmbH, Münster, Germany) instrument equipped with a Bi/Mn liquid metal primary ion source. Pulsed 30 keV Bi Positive ion mass spectra were calibrated using the mass peaks assigned to CH The XPS spectra were recorded using PHI5000 Versaprobe II (PHI5000, ULVAC-PHI, Japan) with an 49 W monochromatic Al Kα radiation ( The zeta potential of each sample was measured using a Malvern Zetasizer instrument (Nano-ZS900, Malvern Inc., UK). First, 1 g marmatite (-38 μm) was added to 40 mL solution with given pH for 2 min. Second, 0.5 mL Milli-Q water or 0.5 mL 4 × 10 ION-TOF Surface Lab 6.8 (ION-TOF GmbH, Münster, Germany) was used for the peak selection and assignment. The mass peaks of each sample spectra were selected by automated peak search routines. Specifically, the mass peaks that meet the following conditions were selected: mass range The high resolution spectra were curve-fitted with Gaussian-Lorentzian line shapes (80% Gaussian for O 1s and S 2p, 85% Gaussian for Pb 4f and Fe 2p) after Shirley background subtraction utilizing the PHI MultiPak 9.3 (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) software. Surface charging effect was corrected with C 1s peak at 284.8 eV as the reference. Spin-orbit energy splitting for S 2p  For all peaks in each element, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) of peaks was limited to a small range of variation. For example, the FWHM of S 2p was constrained to 1.1 ± 0.1 eV. The initial FWHM values of the peaks were referred to those reported in literature. The binding energy of each peak was constrained within a certain range of the value reported in the literature. For example, S 2p Use the chi-square (χ PCA of ToF-SIMS spectra were conducted using the SIMCA 14.1 (MKS Umetrics, Sweden) software. Data pretreatment has an important impact on PCA analysis results (  The PCs 1 and 2 loadings (  In the PC1 loadings plot ( It should be noted that although lead-containing species are not attributed to lead-adsorbed marmatite at pH 11, this does not necessarily mean that the lead-containing peaks did not show up in the spectra from lead-adsorbed marmatite at pH 11, only that the relative intensities of these peaks are lower than those in the spectra from lead-adsorbed marmatite at pH 6.5 and pH 3. The PCA results of ToF-SIMS spectra show that more than two types of lead-containing species generated on the surface of lead-adsorbed marmatite. In other words, lead ions may be adsorbed on the surface of marmatite by the form of Pb-S  XPS high resolution spectra of O 1s, S 2p, Pb 4f/Zn 3s and Fe 2p S 2p spectrum ( The core level spectra of Pb 4f and Zn 3s obtained by curve fitting are depicted in Zn 3s spectrum ( Fe 2p XPS results further confirmed that lead ions were adsorbed on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface in the form of Pb-S, Pb-O-Zn, Pb-O-Fe and lead oxides/hydroxides. The main adsorption forms of lead ions at pH 6.5 and pH 3 are Pb-O-Zn and Pb-O-Fe, while at pH 11 they are lead oxides/hydroxides. The content of oxides and hydroxide species on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface increased with the increasing of pH.  The results of ToF-SIMS and XPS show that there were at least two adsorption forms of lead ions on the marmatite surface at the same pH value, and the adsorption form of lead ions depending on the suspension pH. This study is the first to present direct evidence for the existence of Pb-O-Fe. The existence of Pb-O-Zn coincides with the results obtained by DFT calculation by The XPS results show that the content of Pb-O-Fe and Pb-O-Zn was about 2.5 times that of Pb-S when pH not exceeding 6.5, and the ToF-SIMS results indicate that the former is most easily formed at pH 6.5. If hypothesis that PbS was generated only by Pb and Zn equivalent exchange, while Pb-O-Fe and Pb-O-Zn were formed only by bond to O on the marmatite surface, then the exchange ratio of Pb and Zn was about 3.5 after 3 min activation at pH 3. This assumption seems reasonable, because according to Fe in sphalerite lattice was considered to be beneficial to the oxidation of sphalerite ( The results of flotation test by Combining the results of this study with literature reports, the surface reaction models of lead ions and marmatite are proposed in There were many forms of sulfides, oxides, hydroxides and complexes on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface. Therefore, the interpretation of the XPS spectrum of the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface is very challenging due to the spectral overlap of different species and the uncertainty in high-resolution spectral fitting. Although ToF-SIMS provides more detailed element bonding information and more sensitive monolayer chemical composition information than XPS, ToF-SIMS data is sometimes difficult to interpret owing to the same ion may be derived from multiple species and the data difficult to quantify. The inevitable overlap of ion peaks (e.g. PbS The species on the surface of lead-adsorbed marmatite at pH 3, pH 6.5 and pH 11 conditions were systematically investigated by PCA-assisted ToF-SIMS, XPS, zeta potential and Eh-pH diagram analysis to help elucidating the lead activation mechanisms arising during the flotation of marmatite. The obtained results show that Pb-O-Zn/Pb-O-Fe containing species and Pb-S containing species were major and minor lead-containing species on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface at pH 3 and pH 6.5, respectively, while those at pH 11 were lead oxides/hydroxides and Pb-O-Zn/Pb-O-Fe containing species, respectively. Pb-S containing species and sulfur-rich surface were more likely formed on the lead-adsorbed marmatite surface at lower pH. The results of the zeta potential supported the above evidence. This research project has been supported by the