The presence of cyanide soluble copper in the cyanidation of gold-copper ores and concentrates significantly increases the cyanide consumption in order to achieve sufficient gold recovery. In addition, cyanide recovery or cyanide detoxification/destruction processes are also required which adds extra cost to the process. This research introduces a leaching approach to extract gold, silver and copper from gold-copper ores and concentrates using a synergistic lixiviant leaching process using glycine in the presence of low concentrations of cyanide. The effects of glycine and cyanide concentrations on gold, silver and copper leaching kinetics and recovery were studied. It is shown that, in the presence of glycine, gold, silver and copper extraction increase significantly in solutions containing copper-cyanide species at a very low, or zero, free cyanide concentration. It has also been shown that the gold dissolution rate in glycine-cyanide system is almost three times higher than the gold dissolution rate in the conventional cyanidation. Kinetic studies were conducted to evaluate the effects of glycine concentration, pH, and CN/Cu ratio on the dissolution of gold and silver. It has also been shown that the gold dissolution rate increases by increasing the glycine concentration up to 2.0g/L (Gly:Cu molar ratio of 2.2:1) and any further glycine addition has no significant effect on the dissolution of gold. It is shown that the presence of glycine in solutions containing copper (I)-cyanide species can significantly enhance the dissolution of precious and base metals. The proposed leaching approach significantly reduces the cyanide consumption by at least 75% and most of the copper is present as cupric glycinate in the final leach solution. In addition, gold, silver and copper extraction was higher than the conventional cyanidation process utilising similar cyanide dosages for all the gold-copper sources studied.To extract precious metals from gold-copper ores and concentrates, the presence of copper minerals has detrimental effects on gold extraction unless high cyanide should be added to keep CN:Cu molar ratio above 4. For every 1% of reactive copper present about 30 It is well known that cyanide soluble copper dissolves in cyanide solutions to form toxic copper-cyanide complexes such as Cu(CN) Recently the authors have developed and patented the use of amino acids and particularly glycine, as an alternative lixiviant to cyanide in the gold industry ( Glycine is a non-toxic, non-volatile, and low cost reagent which is produced in large industrial quantities for use in several industries. It can be easily produced industrially or derived as a by-product from different micro-organisms ( Therefore, the main aim of this work is to study and evaluate the application of the glycine-cyanide synergistic (GCS) process on gold extraction from gold-copper ores and concentrates. The main principle of the process is to utilise glycine to regenerate cyanide ions from copper WAD cyanide in the presence of very low or zero free cyanide in the leach solutions. The proposed process aims to introduce several advantages in treating gold-copper ores and concentrates, such as (1) low cyanide consumption compared to the conventional cyanidation; (2) high gold, silver and copper extraction; (3) leaching conducted at a very low or no free cyanide in the leach solutions; (4) most of the copper in the final leach solution present as cupric glycinate; and (5) replacing the use of high cyanide with much safer and environmentally benign reagents. Three samples of different gold-copper sources have been used and tested to conduct this research and the description of these samples are: Cu-Au-Ag gravity concentrate with complex copper mineralogy Cu-Au ore (oxide Au ore with nuisance Cu) Cu-Au ore (porphyry sulfide ore with low grade Au and recoverable levels of Cu). These materials are discussed below. The concentrate was produced from a centrifugal gravity separator at a gold-copper plant in Western Australia. The gravity concentrate sample was then ground to 100% passing 75 The gold-copper oxides and gold-copper sulfides samples were provided from two different Western Australian mining companies. The samples were then split and ground to 100% passing 75 All experiments were carried out using solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and deionised water. Unless specified, all experiments are conducted using a bottle roller, and the ore or concentrate sample and glycine-cyanide solution were placed in a 2.5 The mineralogical analysis of the three tested samples by XRD are shown in  Preliminary experiments were conducted to evaluate the leaching of gold-copper ores/concentrate by the GCS and conventional cyanidation processes. This was done using three different gold-copper sources covering gold-copper concentrates, gold-copper oxides and gold-copper sulfides ores. The following sections cover the gold and copper extraction from ores and gold, silver and copper extraction form a concentrate. The gold extraction from leaching gold-copper oxides ore, containing 12.9 Gold extraction from the gold-copper oxides by GCS and direct cyanidation processes is shown in Eq.  In GCS process, most of the dissolved copper were complexed by glycine which leads to be more available cyanide to leach and complex gold. According to Eq. Gold and copper extraction from gold-copper sulfides ore, containing 0.77  Gold extraction from gold-copper oxides at 300 Gold extraction from gold-copper gravity concentrate which contains 47.5 It can be seen that at 800  Silver extraction was enhanced by adding glycine to cyanide solutions as shown in On the other hand, with the GCS process most of the copper in the final leach solution is present as cupric glycinate complex (shown in The results shown in It has been shown the presence of glycine in a starved cyanide leach solution enhances gold extraction from gold-copper sources. Glycine stabilises the cupric ion in the system which acts as a stronger oxidant for gold leaching ( Glycine concentration of 5 It can be seen that increasing glycine to copper molar ratio increases gold and copper extractions. Most of the gold (99.4%) and copper (88.2%) was extracted at Gly:Cu ratio of 2.2:1 (2 To further investigate the effect of cyanide concentration on gold, silver and copper dissolutions, three levels of cyanide were added at a fixed initial glycine concentration of 10 It is not surprising to observe that the metals extraction increase when the initial cyanide concentration increases, due to higher WAD cyanide generation. This was also observed during gold leaching from pure gold disc electrode by glycine-cyanide mixtures (  Leaching studies of different gold-copper sources has been conducted and a comparison between conventional cyanidation and glycine-cyanide synergistic leach process has been made. The effect of glycine/copper and cyanide/copper molar ratios on gold and copper leaching kinetics in synergistic leach process has also been studied. The synergistic leach process treats gold-copper deposits by breaking down the copper-cyanide complexes to give a zero, or a very low free cyanide concentration in the presence of glycine. The synergistic process was found to be very effective to treat complex copper-gold deposits with four significant advantages, being (1) low cyanide consumption; (2) high metals recovery; (3) zero or very low free cyanide during the leaching; and (4) copper complexed largely with glycine rather than cyanide in the final tailing solutions. Adding CN:Cu at 1:1