CeO2, TiO2, and CeO2–TiO2 layered thin films of different compositions were deposited on polished fused silica glass substrates using spin coating and then annealed at 550 °C for 1 h. Poorly crystalline fluorite-type CeO2 and anatase-type TiO2 were the only phases detected. The valence effects for Ce are attributed to intervalence charge transfer (IVCT) while those for TiO2 are attributed to simultaneous Ti4+ → Ti3+ redox and IVCT. Contamination of the grain boundaries by Si from the substrate is likely to have contributed to blockage of surface-active sites. While the roughnesses of the former thin films exhibited the expected direct correlation with the grain size, those of the latter two types of thin films showed a converse relation, suggesting that the grain boundaries of the layered TiO2 thin films included a recrystallized CeO2–TiO2 invariant point liquid and/or a CeO2–TiO2–SiO2 glass. These would have derived from the other sources of grain boundary contamination, which are Si contamination from the substrate and/or exsolved CeO2 beyond the solubility limit of TiO2. The UV–Vis spectra demonstrated two principal types of curves, with the CeO2 and higher TiO2 concentration giving typical spectra with sharp absorption edges while those of the lower TiO2 concentration indicated highly defective nanostructures with diffuse absorption edges. These data support the conclusion that CeO2 initially decreases the Eg by enhancing nucleation and recrystallization through defect formation but subsequently increases the Eg through supersaturation and consequent lattice distortion. The CeO2 thin films exhibited much worse photocatalytic performances than those of the TiO2 thin films, although no significant differences between the TiO2 thin films and the CeO2–TiO2 layered thin films were apparent, which probably resulted from the competing effects of blockage of the active sites on the grain boundaries and the extent of recrystallization of the thin film phases, the latter of which is more significant.Owing to growing environmental issues, metal oxide semiconductors have emerged for use as photocatalysts for environmental remediation. Both CeO Considerable research has been done to develop composite films using both CeO Since the data for the effects of variations in the CeO The present work reports an examination of a sequence of complementary thin film types, including CeO The preparation of the precursor solutions was essentially identical to that used for the sol-gel synthesis of CeO The precursor solution was prepared using cerium nitrate hexahydrate (99% purity, Sigma-Aldrich) as the source of Ce dissolved in ethanol. Lactic acid (85%, Univar) and ethylene glycol (99+%, Alfa Aesar) were used as rheological stabilizers. The 0.15 M solution was prepared in two steps: a) the solution was obtained firstly by dissolving 0.01 mol of cerium nitrate hexahydrate in 30 mL of ethanol. Separately, 30 mL of ethanol, 0.5 mL of lactic acid, and 0.7 mL of ethylene glycol were mixed. Both solutions were magnetically stirred separately at room temperature at a stirring speed 450 rpm for 30 min. Finally, the solutions were mixed and magnetically stirred at room temperature at a stirring speed 450 rpm for 1 h in order to obtain the transparent and colorless CeO The 1 M TiO The polished fused silica glass substrates (2.0 cm × 1.5 cm) were ultrasonically cleaned in distilled water for 10 min. The CeO Each CeO The mineralogies of the thin films were determined by Laser Raman microspectroscopy (Raman; He–Cd UV laser excitation source, wavelength 532 nm, beam diameter 1 μm, Renishaw inVia) and glancing angle X-ray diffraction (GAXRD; 45 kV, 40 mA, PANalytical Empyrean Thin-Film XRD). Atomic force microscopy (AFM; scan size 1 μm × 1 μm, Bruker Dimension Icon SPM) was used to determine the grain sizes and roughnesses of the films. The surface chemistry was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; 13 kV, 12 mA, spot size 500 μm, 2–5 nm beam penetration, Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer Microprobe). The optical transmittance of the thin films was analyzed using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer (UV–Vis; dual beam, PerkinElmer Lambda 35). The optical indirect band gap (E The photocatalytic properties of the thin films were evaluated by determining the photodegradation of methylene blue (MB) under UV radiation and assessing the degradation using UV–Vis (664 nm, PerkinElmer Lambda 35). The MB solutions were prepared using methylene blue (M9140, dye content 82 wt%, Sigma Aldrich) dissolved in deionized water at 10 The Raman spectra of all the thin films are shown in For the anatase thin films in For the CeO Effect of TiO (i) (iii) Effect of CeO (i) (ii) Examination of the E   These data indicate that the higher concentration of CeO  This is supported by the data in  One explanation is that the Ce Neither of these situations would result in alteration of the Ti valence. However, the decreasing Ti valence (comparisons b and e) can be explained by Ti The increasing Ti valence (comparisons c and f) is more challenging to explain because the other remaining mechanism of charge compensation involves the effect of CeO Finally, another possibility is the simultaneous effect of redox and IVCT, which is indicated in Equation However, the higher redox potential for Ce  Two-dimensional AFM images of the CeO  However, the CeO The higher transmittance of the 0.50 M CeO For the three 3 M TiO For the three more defective 1 M TiO The higher transmittances and lower E For the fused silica substrates, the increasing order of the glass structure from annealing [  UV-Translucent: If the 0.50 M CeO Highly Defective: The E More Ordered: CeO The photocatalytic activity assessed by the degradation of the MB dye solution is shown in CeO The Raman and GAXRD data showed that fluorite-type CeO The XPS analyses revealed that Ce The AFM results showed the presence of grains of ~8–10 nm for the CeO The UV–Vis spectra revealed two principal types of curves, where the higher TiO The photocatalytic activity testing basically revealed only that the CeO The authors are grateful for the financial support of the