In recent years, with the aim of lowering the environmental impact of concrete, the partial replacement of cement in concrete with fly ash (FA) and ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBS) has received significant attention. This paper presents the first experimental study on the properties of concrete containing ternary binders with high volume Class-F FA and GGBS partially replacing cement up to 90%. A total of 15 batches of concrete were manufactured with binary and ternary binders based on FA, GGBS, and cement. Experimental tests were performed to establish the density, workability, compressive strength, elastic modulus, flexural strength, splitting tensile strength, and water absorption of different mixes. The results indicate that the compressive strength of concrete containing FA decreases significantly with an increase in the FA content from 50% to 90%. The concretes containing GGBS at up to 90% cement replacement exhibit a similar compressive strength to that of conventional concrete after 28 days. It is found that ternary mixes with a 70% replacement ratio and relative FA to GGBS ratio (Ψ) of 1:2, and those with a 50% replacement ratio and Ψ of 1:1 develop a similar 28- and 90-day compressive strength to that of conventional concrete. A further increase in the replacement ratio and Ψ results in a decrease in the compressive strength. The results also show that GGBS mixes develop a slightly higher 28-day elastic modulus than that of conventional concrete mix. Although the elastic modulus of FA and the majority of the ternary mixes is lower than that of conventional concrete, ternary mixes with 70% (Ψ of 1:2) and 50% (Ψ of 1:1) replacement ratios develop a similar elastic modulus to that of conventional concrete. It is observed that an increase in the FA and GGBS content, respectively, results in a significant increase and moderate decrease in the water absorption of concrete. All ternary mixes with up to 90% cement replacement exhibit lower water absorption than conventional concrete mix. These highly promising findings suggest that the technology used in this study can provide an attractive avenue for high volume use of FA and GGBS in concrete with the possibility of significantly reducing its environmental impact.Concrete is the most widely used construction material. High volume use of concrete leads to the consumption of large amounts of energy on the production, transportation, and use of raw materials ( One alternative for reducing the environmental impact of concrete is to use industrial by-products as mineral admixtures to replace the OPC in concrete ( In the past two decades, a large number of studies have been conducted to understand the performance of concrete containing FA and GGBS. Most of the existing studies on the use of FA and GGBS in concrete were concerned with a relatively low volume replacement of cement (i.e., below 50%) with up to 30% and 40%, respectively. Although there are a number of studies that investigated the high volume Class-F ( Water absorption is a key parameter in the investigation of the durability of concrete. This paper presents the first experimental study to investigate the physical and mechanical properties of concretes containing high volume Class-F FA and GGBS binary and ternary binders with cement replacement ratios up to 90%. This study is also the first to investigate the splitting tensile strength, flexural strength, and water absorption of concrete containing the combination of high volume FA and GGBS (i.e., replacement ratio >50%). The paper initially provides a summary of the experimental program, including material properties, specimen properties, and testing procedures, which is followed by the results of the experimental program. A detailed discussion on the results is subsequently presented to discuss the effects of the cement replacement with FA and GGBS on the properties of concrete. The promising technology presented in this study allows the reduction of the environmental impact of both the industrial by-products and concrete and has the potential of significantly contributing toward a greener construction industry. The physical properties of the natural aggregates are shown in In this study, high early strength cement (HESC) was used to minimize the effects of the low strength development at early curing stages of FA and GGBS concretes. The chemical composition and physical properties of the OPC and HESC used in this study are shown in Class-F FA used in this study was sourced from the Port Augusta power station in South Australia. This FA is a by-product of combusting fine ground Leigh Creek Coal, which was extracted by electrostatic precipitators for the power station exhaust gases. The chemical composition and physical properties of FA shown in GGBS used in this study was produced as a by-product of iron and steel-making procedure at the Birkenhead Works in Adelaide. The chemical composition and physical properties of the GGBS shown in 15 unique batches of concrete, including: two control batches (one with OPC and one with HESC), three batches of concrete with binary mix of FA and HESC, three batches of concrete with binary mix of GGBS and HESC, and seven batches of concrete with ternary mix of FA, GGBS, and HESC, were prepared at the Concrete Materials Laboratory at the University of Adelaide. A series of tests including: the workability, compressive strength, elastic modulus, flexural strength, splitting tensile strength, and water absorption, was undertaken to evaluate the properties of fresh and hardened concretes. Two types of specimens were used in obtaining the mechanical properties; namely, beams and cylinders. The beam specimens were used for the flexural strength tests and they had a width and depth of 75 mm and length of 285 mm. The compressive strength, elastic modulus, and splitting tensile strength tests were established using 100 × 200 mm cylinders. The test parameters included: the weight replacement ratio of cement with FA ( The concrete series in As shown in The experimental methods used in this paper to determine the concrete properties are shown in  As can be seen in  It can be seen in It can be seen from It can be seen in    A review of the existing design codes and standards (  This paper has presented the results of an experimental study on the properties of concretes containing different percentages of FA, GGBS, and their combinations as cement replacement. On the basis of the experimental results the following conclusions can be drawn: Replacement of cement with 90% FA and GGBS, respectively, results in 58% increase and 51% decrease in the slump of the concrete. The workability of ternary mixes is higher than that of conventional concrete and it increases with an increase in GGBS mixes exhibit a similar 28- and 90-day compressive strength to that of conventional concrete, whereas FA mixes develop a lower strength that decreases with an increase in FA and GGBS mixes, respectively, develop a lower and higher elastic modulus than that of conventional concrete. An increase in The flexural and splitting tensile strength of ternary mixes are lower than that of conventional concrete. Ternary mixes with FA and GGBS mixes, respectively, develop a higher and lower water absorption compared to that of conventional concrete. An increase in The assessment results show that ACI 318-11, JSCE-07, and JCI-08 code expressions provide relatively accurate predictions of The findings of this study help better understand physical and mechanical behavior of concrete containing high volume Class-F FA and GGBS. The experimental results show that properly designed mixes can develop properties that match those of conventional concrete. These findings are very promising as the high volume replacement of cement with FA and GGBS provides a highly attractive avenue to achieve resource sustainability in construction by reducing the environmental impact of both industrial by-products and conventional concrete. However, as FA and GGBS concretes exhibit different long-term hydration characteristics than those of conventional concretes, additional studies are recommended to investigate their time-dependent (e.g., drying shrinkage, creep) and long-term durability-related (e.g., acid and sulfate resistance, chloride penetration) properties. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the