“Sciences of Carbon Materials” is another winner from the Universidad de Alicante thoroughbred stable of Marsh and Rodriguez-Reinoso. The book is a follow-up to the previous publication “Introduction to Carbon Technologies” from the same stable, but this is no carbon copy although following the same successful format of assembling a series of chapters prepared by authors drawn from far and wide. The 30 authors who have contributed to the 19 chapters also come from a range of disciplines rightly reflecting the interdisciplinary nature of carbon science and technology. It is therefore to be expected that the scope of the book is wide, ranging as it does from chapters on the structure in carbons to others on various aspects of coal utilization. There are chapters covering applications of carbons in nuclear energy and in semi-conductors with following sections on various aspects of the properties and composition of pitch, including the newer mesophase pitch as well as the more traditional coal-tar and petroleum pitches. This then leads on quite smoothly to carbon fibres and their activation. Adsorption, porosity, gasification, oxidation protection and mechanical properties all receive quite thorough treatment in a logical sequence before the last five chapters dealing with several different aspects of coal science and technology. Coal can of course be considered and treated as an impure carbon and there is a clear inter-relationship between carbon science and coal science. Coal porosity and petrography in addition to coal combustion, carbonization and liquefaction are all described in sufficient detail to whet the appetite. I wonder what the next runner from this stable will offer? The book is well prepared with clear text, diagrams and illustrations. It is well referenced and is highly informative serving admirably as both reference and text book. The authors can be well satisfied with their contributions and the editors are to be congratulated in drawing together these various strands to produce a good value for money book which is highly recommended to the coal and carbon communities. One final thought: what a nice gesture to dedicate the book to the memory of Rosalind Franklin.