The management of ankle fracture in the elderly remains controversial. A review of the early results of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) in 74 patients over the age of 70 years (average 76 years) was undertaken to identify the early complications, length of stay, return to pre-injury mobility and residential status. This revealed 1% deep infection, 9% delayed wound healing, 5% malunion, and 3% mortality. In 12% of patients, soft bone and comminution precluded fixation of one malleolus. The average length of stay for patients who walked with Zimmer frame (116±65 days) before injury was significantly longer than those who walked independently or with sticks (19±15 days; P<0.01). The inability of the patients to weight-bear early led to lengthy hospital stays and difficult socio-economic problems. However, the majority (85%) of patients regained their pre-injury mobility and residential status. We conclude that ORIF of ankle fractures in the elderly carries a significant risk of wound edge necrosis with delayed wound healing but the incidence of deep infection is relatively low. Poor bone quality presents technical difficulties but the majority of patients can expect good outcome.The management of ankle fractures in the elderly remains controversial and, in general, ankle fractures are treated by non-operative methods in this group of patients. However, some fractures are highly unstable and non-operative treatment can be difficult. Surgery in the elderly carries an increased risk due to pre-existing medical problems, osteoporosis-which may preclude stable fixation, and poor wound healing due to the quality of soft tissue around the ankle. High rates of post-operative complications have been reported in the elderly with infection in 12% of patients From 1989 to 1998, 2959 patients underwent ORIF of ankle fractures at our hospital. 74 (2.8%) of these patients were aged 70 years or greater and it is this cohort that forms the retrospective review. The data were collected from the case notes and X-rays. Pre-operative details included the demographic data, type of fracture, mechanism of injury, past medical history, acute medical problems during admission and the initial treatment undertaken. The operation details included the time from injury to surgery, grade of surgeon, antibiotic prophylaxis, implants and intraoperative complications. The post-operative details included medical and orthopaedic complications, the method of splintage, length of hospital stay (LOS), follow up care, mobility status and residential status at the time of final discharge. Talar shift was assessed by measuring the “the medial clear space” in the X-rays from immediate post op, six weeks and at final discharge The treatment was dictated by the consultant on-call on the day of admission. In general, a policy of non-operative treatment was followed for ankle fractures in the elderly. All patients with displaced fracture underwent manipulation under intravenous sedation and above knee plasters were applied. If the initial reduction was unsatisfactory, the patient underwent repeated manipulation under general anaesthesia. ORIF was performed if it was not possible to reduce and hold the fracture in plaster. If the reduction was satisfactory, non-operative treatment was continued and weekly follow-up undertaken. At any stage, if the position was lost, patients were considered for re-manipulation or internal fixation. ORIF was only undertaken in patients who were able to walk. Following surgery, all the patients were protected by below knee plaster and remained non-weight bearing (NWB) for 6–8 weeks. This policy was adopted in our unit after a previous audit had demonstrated high complication and malunion rates following early weight bearing in elderly patients undergoing ORIF Seventy-four patients over 70 years had ORIF of ankle fractures. There were 58 females (78%) and 16 males (22%). The average age was 76 years (70–91). There were 66 (89%) closed fractures and 8 Grade II open fractures (11%) All injuries were due to simple falls except one, which was a road traffic accident. These elderly patients had many medical problems. 55% of the patients suffered from two-system disease and were in a stable condition. Eleven percent of patients suffered from three-system disease and 5% had acute medical problems that needed treatment before surgery. Only 34% of patients had no significant medical co-morbidities. Thirty-five percent of patients had a relative at home to help. The rest lived alone except one who came from a nursing home. There were different grades of pre-operative walking capacity from walking unaided (80%) to Zimmer walking frame with help. Some patients were able to walk miles without problems and others were only able to shuffle inside their homes. There was no patient in this cohort who could not walk pre-operatively. Thirty-eight patients (51%) were initially treated with manipulation under anaesthesia and plaster immobilisation. They underwent operative treatment after the position in the plaster was lost. Three of these patients had undergone repeated MUA and still failed. Twenty-six patients (35%) underwent surgery within 48 h of injury, 19 patients (26%) between 48 h and 1 week, 24 patients (32%) between 1 and 3 weeks and five patients (7%) after 3 weeks. All patients had antibiotic prophylaxis and subcutaneous heparin for prophylaxis against thrombo-embolism. Consultant surgeons undertook 32 operations (43%) and surgeons in training performed 42 operation (57%). Lateral malleolus fixation, using 1/3 tubular plates and screws, was performed in 53 patients (72%) and percutaneous rush pin in 12 patients (16%). Forty-four of these patients had combined medial and lateral fixation whilst seven patients had isolated medial malleolar fixation with screws or tension band wiring. Twenty-one patients had isolated lateral malleolar fixation. There were no isolated medial malleolar fractures. A diastasis screw was used in five ankles. Deltoid ligament repair was performed in two cases where the ruptured ligament was incarcerated within the joint. One patient, suffering from diabetic neuropathy, and one with an open fracture were treated by external fixator. Soft bone and comminution precluded the planned fixation on one side in nine (12%) patients. All patients were immobilised in a plaster cast for 6–8 weeks after surgery. Following surgery there was one deep infection (1%) with Following surgery, 84% of patients remained NWB for 6–8 weeks. Because of social problems and poor mobilisation they often required prolonged hospital stay and rehabilitation services. The average length of stay (LOS) was 26 days with a range of 2–175 days. The average LOS for open fractures (69 days) was more than three times that of closed fracture (21 days). The number of systemic diseases or acute medical problems did not make a significant difference to the LOS but pre-operative mobility was an important factor. The LOS of patients who walked with a Zimmer frame before surgery (mean 116±61 days) was significantly longer than those who walked with sticks or unaided prior to injury (mean 19±15 days; All fractures healed but there was loss of reduction, resulting in greater than 2-mm talar shift in four patients (5%). Two other patients rapidly developed arthritis (3%): one diabetic developed a neuropathic joint and the other rapidly developed secondary osteoarthritis. Four patients had their diastasis screw removed at 8 weeks. In one demented patient the implants pulled out on the first day as she jumped out of bed in the night. She underwent re-fixation that failed and needed a calcaneo-tibial Steinman pin. Implants were removed in three patients at 1 year due to skin irritation. Most patients (84%) returned to pre-operative mobility and were eventually able to return to their pre-injury residential status. Ten percent of patients, who were self-caring before injury, became dependent on home help. The ultimate aim of treating ankle fractures in the elderly is to obtain fracture union with a pain-free ankle. This should allow the patient to maintain their mobility and return to their pre-injury residential status. In the very elderly, anatomic reconstruction may not be necessary but a reasonable anatomical congruity should be attained. Maintenance of congruity of the joint is one of the important factors for achieving the goals of treatment in this age group. If the only way to achieve joint congruity is ORIF, these patients should not be denied surgery because of their age. We believe that a well-balanced approach is needed. The majority of these fractures can be treated by non-operative means and internal fixation should only be undertaken if it is required to obtain and maintain an adequate reduction. Because of osteoporosis, the fixation should always be protected with an external plaster splint and the patient should remain NWB for 6–8 weeks. The limitations of the present study must be recognised. In common with all retrospective research, the selection criteria may not be reproducible and our information system did not allow us to identify how many ankle fractures were treated non-operatively in the same period. However, the study does provide some useful information and our results are encouraging with a relatively low complication rate in this high-risk group. The perioperative mortality was 3% with a deep infection rate of 1%. The major problem was delayed wound healing (9%). These results compare favourably with the results of surgery for hip fracture in a similar age group The infection rate of 1% compares well with that reported by Anand The LOS remains a problem in these patients. The present techniques of internal fixation do not allow weight bearing in osteoporotic bone and a large proportion of patients in this age group are unable to undertake their activities of daily living in this situation. The LOS for patients with open fracture was a particular problem. Increased facilities for intermediate care on an orthogeriatric rehabilitation unit In conclusion, internal fixation of ankle fractures in the elderly can be undertaken safely: the perioperative mortality is relatively low (3%) but poor wound healing (9%) remains a problem. It must be recognised that the present study was undertaken in a highly selected group of patients – they were mobile before injury and all had failed non-operative treatment. Poor bone quality presents technical difficulties and the LOS presents socio-economic problems. However, the majority of the patients can expect a good outcome. The authors would like to thank the Nottingham Trauma Group for allowing us review their patients: Mr. D.M. Hahn, Mr. B.J. Holdsworth, Mr. C.J. Howell, Mr. J.B. Hunter, Mr. J.A. Oni, Mr. A.R. Manktelow, Mr. P.J. Radford, Miss B.E. Scammell and Mr. E.P. Szypryt.