The aim of the present study was elucidating reaction mechanism of the TiO2–Al–C–Fe system during self-propagating high-temperature synthesis. Results showed that the addition of Fe to the 3TiO2+4Al+3C reactants from 1.21mol to 1.71mol led to instability of the combustion reaction and the formation of nano-crystalline TiC. Differential thermal analysis and X-ray diffraction analysis results demonstrated that during heating of the 3TiO2–4Al–3C–1.71Fe mixture, four sequential exothermic reactions occurred at 588, 913, 1036 and 1173°C. They were corresponding to the solid state reaction between Fe and Al, the reaction of Al melt with TiO2, the formation of Ti3Al, and finally, the establishment of TiC and Fe3Al. Moreover, the ignition temperature of the reaction between Ti and C decreased in the presence of Fe. Microstructural examinations of Fe particles showed that the formation of Fe-rich melt accelerated the dissolution of C, Al, and Ti into the molten Fe droplets. Finally, when the melt saturated from C and Ti, TiC particles precipitated through the dissolution-precipitation mechanism.Combustion synthesis (CS) is a low-cost and quick process to produce different ceramic matrix and metal matrix composites Recently, aluminum oxide (Al The authors previously studied the SHS products of the TiO Recently, some studies have been conducted to determine the SHS reaction mechanism of the TiO The raw materials used in this research were titanium oxide (TiO The SHS process was conducted according to the procedure previously explained by the authors Based on our previous findings The heat released from an exothermic reaction increases the temperature of the products. The adiabatic temperature ( To characterize the synthesis products, crystallite size of TiC was calculated from X-ray patterns by implementing Scherrer method  In a similar research, Choi and Rhee Also, the second exothermic peak at 1008 As shown in Therefore, the exothermic peak at 588 However, Fe Regardless of that exothermic reaction at 588 Therefore, it is observed that the addition of Fe to the 3TiO  By changing position from the raw materials to the products, some gray particles were observed in the outer part of the Fe particle as shown in Since the main goal of the present research was elucidating the reaction mechanism of the 3TiO During heating, Al particles were melted and spread among other reactants. Because of the high cooling rate of the SHS process, no solid-state reaction occurred between Fe and Al. The liquid Al Then reacted with TiO In the present study, SHS characteristics and reaction mechanism of the TiO Authors are highly grateful to the Ferdowsi University of Mashhad and Central Research Laboratory, Vice Chancellor of Research and Technology, Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences for providing analytical facilities.