The effect of organic liquids (white spirit, perchloroethylene and methylene bromide) typically used in float/sink gravity separations (specific gravity 1.4–1.8) on the fundamental properties of a higher-inert Western Canadian metallurgical coal of mvb rank (Romax 1.22) and its resultant coking ability were examined. Over a 6-month period, untreated (control) and treated coal were characterized using a wide range of analyses including elemental chemistry, FTIR spectroscopy, alkali extraction via light transmittance test and thermal rheology, specifically fluidity, Dilatation, FSI and Caking Index G. Exposure to organic liquids was found to have a minor effect on coal chemistry (Ultimate) and oxidation level (Alkali Extraction via Light Transmission Test and FTIR-Spectroscopy). Trends of H/C, O/C, Light Transmittance and FTIR absorbance spectra versus storage time, following initial 1h exposure to the organic liquids of varying specific gravities, revealed only minor changes, within the scatter/accuracy of the measurements. However, several coal plastic properties were decreased significantly including Gieseler Maximum Fluidity, Dilatation and G Caking Index. Of these, most affected was Maximum Fluidity which underwent an immediate and dramatic decrease of over 80% following organic liquids treatment. Other rheology indicators including FSI and Sapozhnikov were significantly less sensitive in detecting initial stages of degradation in plastic properties. The coking ability of both the untreated and treated coal in perchloroethylene (PCE) organic liquid, s.g. 1.6, after storage for 1 and 6months was assessed through carbonization trials in both a small-scale sole-heated oven (12.5kg capacity) and in a pilot-scale movable wall oven (350kg capacity) at CanmetENERGY Carbonization facility, Ottawa, Canada. The treated samples had appreciably poorer quality ambient (ASTM, IRSID, JIS tumbler tests) and hot (CSR, CRI) coke strength and modified coke structure. Coke ASTM strength for untreated and treated coal at time 1month was respectively decreased from 62 down to 57 for Stability and from 72 to 67 for Hardness. Similarly, Coke CSR and CRI for untreated and treated coal at time 1month was respectively decreased from 74 down to 58 and increased from 21 to 29. The treated sample resulted in a lower coke yield, 71%, in comparison with 78% for the untreated sample, produced coke of smaller mean size, 46mm, than the untreated sample, 53mm, and generated an appreciably higher fraction of fines (−12.5mm), 21%, than untreated sample, 4%. The coke textures from the untreated coal consist of higher carbon forms, mosaic and flow in medium size, compared to those from s.g. 1.6 treated coal of lower carbon forms, very fine and fine mosaic, which renders the coke more reactive to CO2 gasification during CSR test. The higher effective coking rank, 1.2, and Coke Mosaic Size Index, 2.4, of untreated sample relative to that of treated one, 1.1 and 2.2, respectively, supports the better coke quality of the untreated sample. Extension of storage time to 6months resulted in negligible changes in coke quality showing that the greatest changes occurred within the first month following exposure to organic liquids. Comparison of 1month untreated and PCE treated mid coking rank Western Canadian (Romax 1.22) and Australian (Romax 1.17) coals show both to undergo comparable decrease in fluidity (50–60%) post treatment with PCE although only the Western Canadian coal leads to lower dilatation. Coke yield is also decreased for the Western Canadian coal and essentially maintained for the Australian coal. Both CSR and CRI are affected negatively and more so for the Western Canadian coal, 16 point drop in CSR and 8 point increase in CRI, relative to the Australian coal, 3 point drop in CSR and 4 point increase in CRI.During the exploration phase of coal mine development, the evaluation of coal and coke quality is often determined using smaller mass samples collected from drill cores. Drilling is the least expensive method of obtaining representative coal seam samples when compared to developing test pits or adits. If a larger bulk sample is required, it is sometimes possible to use several 6 Clean coal samples for quality testing are normally prepared by screening out coarser fractions while the finest fraction is cleaned by froth flotation. The coarser coal is then cleaned using mixtures of organic liquids (i.e. white spirit, perchloroethylene (PCE) and methylene bromide) in a float-and-sink process. During the float-and-sink procedure, the coal sample is separated at relative densities (specific gravity, s.g.) – i.e. white spirit/PCE for 1.4 For years the primary concern in the handling and use of organic liquids such as perchloroethylene (PCE) was the safety risks associated with human exposure. PCE is a known carcinogen and poses a safety hazard for laboratory operators. However, a number of observations about how PCE may impact coal sample coking quality have also been noted. In 2010 Campbell at ALS Coal Technology, Australia found that organic liquids could interfere with the properties of interest for a coal producer or end user Contrary to what the Inland Steel patent outlines, Iveson and Galvin found that the negative effect of PCE treatment/exposure was shown to be more significant when coal had high inertinite content (> The evidence that organic liquids, as discussed previously, affect the coking properties of low fluidity Australian coals implies that Western Canadian coals, known to have moderate fluidity levels, could be affected in a similar way. Canadian geologists have also found that cleaned drill core coal samples often had lower caking/coking properties than bulk or production coal samples. Based on these observations, the Canadian Carbonization Research Association (CCRA) undertook a program to investigate the impact of the organic solvents used in float-sink procedures on the coal and coke properties of a higher-inert Western Canadian coal sample. The objectives of this research were to: Examine the effect of exposing a higher-inert Western Canadian coal to various organic liquids used in typical float-sink procedures on resulting coal and coke quality; and Determine if storage time influences the resulting coal samples and their coke quality. A suitable drill-core sample was not available for testing from a CCRA member at the time program was undertaken. Consequently a cleaned higher-inert Western Canadian production coal (Romax The gross bulk coal sample was split into subsamples for lab and pilot scale oven testing. There were two types of samples consisting of the original coal (control) and samples treated with organic chemicals. Since the bulk coal production sample included the full spectrum of sizes, the subsamples treated in organic chemicals were first screened to remove the froth flotation product since this fraction is not included in drill core sample float-sink preparations. After the coarser fractions were exposed to the organic solvents, the fines fraction was recombined before lab coal quality testing. Three smaller mass samples would be soaked for 60 Perchloroethylene mixed with white spirit (1.4 Perchloroethylene (1.6 Perchloroethylene mixed with methylene bromide (1.8 Larger mass samples were prepared for coke oven testing; one was the “control” untreated sample while the other was for treatment with PCE. For the samples treated in organic liquids, they were air dried in an air-circulating oven at 38 All samples were tested for changes in their chemistry, oxidation/aging level, and rheology at times Coal quality lab testing included the following analyses: Proximate, Ultimate, Petrography, Infra-red spectroscopy, Alkali extraction, Gieseler Fluidity, Ruhr Dilatation, Free-swelling index, Sapozhnikov, and G Caking Index. These were conducted at: GWIL-Birtley Coal Testing, Calgary, Canada, David E. Pearson & Associates (Petrography), Victoria, Canada, ALS Coal Division, Richmond, BC, Canada and Norman B. Keevil Institute of Mining Engineering Laboratory, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. Coke oven tests were performed at the CanmetENERGY Carbonization facility, Ottawa, Canada using the Sole-heated oven (12.5 Key quality parameters of higher-inert western Canadian coal investigated in this work are listed in Exposure to organic liquids had a minor effect on coal chemistry (Ultimate) and oxidation level (Alkali Extraction via Light Transmission Test and FTIR-Spectroscopy). In fact, trends of H/C, O/C, Light Transmittance and FTIR absorbance spectra versus storage time, following initial 1 Treatment of the candidate coal with organic liquids of various densities had an immediate and dramatic effect on the Gieseler Maximum Fluidity (MF) as it decreased from 27 Dilatation and Caking Index G (binding strength of a test coal to inert anthracite during coking to 850  These Figures show that the Caking Index G is more impacted than the FSI. Both these indices definitely show a drop in the binding strength/propensity of the higher-inert Canadian coal with increased density of the float/sink liquid. Samples of the higher-inert western Canadian coal soaked in the PCE organic liquid (s.g. 1.6) were coked after 1 and 6 Coke tumble strength assessed using ASTM (ASTM D3402-93(2008)), IRSID (ISO 556:1980) and JIS (JIS K 2151:2004) drum tumbler tests were all found to be lower for treated than for untreated samples (  Coke hot strength CSR and CRI for organic liquid treated samples decreased significantly compared to the untreated samples ( These results clearly show that treatment with PCE of the higher-inert Western Canadian coal sample had an immediate significant degradation effect on its resultant ambient and hot coke strengths. Carbonization of the treated sample resulted in a lower coke yield, 71%, in comparison with 78% for the untreated sample. The treated sample produced coke of smaller mean size, 46 Coke texture data at time 1 Coke from untreated sample contained about twice the volume of flow/lenticular anisotropic carbon form compared to the treated sample. In fact, the fraction of very fine and fine coke mosaic forms, known to increase the degree of coke reactivity in CO The coke texture findings translate to fact that the untreated sample has a higher ‘effective’ coking rank, 1.18 (1 Coke textures from untreated and s.g. 1.6 PCE treated coal (1  A comparison of the 1 In terms of chemistry, slight decrease observed in ash level for Western Canadian with no change detected for the Australian coal. Also, no changes were found in Volatile Matter and Fixed carbon for Australian coal. For rheology, both Western Canadian and Australian coals undergo 50–60% drop in fluidity after treatment in PCE. The treated Western Canadian coal demonstrates lower dilatation relative to the untreated sample, which is not observed for the Australian coal. FSI of Western Canadian and Australian coals are slightly decreased following treatment in PCE. Sole-heated oven contraction of untreated and treated Western Canadian coal are similar at − In terms of coke properties, significant difference is found in coke yield between the Canadian and Australian coals as the yield for the treated Western Canadian coal is 9% lower relative to untreated sample. For the Australian coal, the coke yield of the treated sample is 0.8% higher than that of untreated sample. For CSR, both the Western Canadian and Australian coals exhibit a drop following PCE treatment but extent of decrease for former coal is appreciably more compared to latter coal, specifically 16 points and 3 points absolute, respectively. In turn, CRI is increased by 8 points and 4 points respectively for the Western Canadian and Australian coals. In summary, both Western Canadian and Australian coals of mvb rank undergo comparable decrease in fluidity (50–60%) after treatment with PCE although only the Western Canadian coal undergoes a drop in dilatation. The coke yield is also lowered in the case of the Western Canadian coal and essentially maintained for the Australian coal. Both CSR and CRI are affected more negatively for the Western Canadian coal relative to the Australian coal. The main findings from this investigation on effect of organic liquids (white spirit, perchloroethylene and methylene bromide) typically used in float/sink gravity separations (specific gravity 1.4–1.8) on the fundamental properties of a higher-inert Western Canadian metallurgical coal of mvb rank (Romax 1.22) and its resultant coking ability are: Coal chemistry (Ultimate) and oxidation level (Alkali Extraction via Light Transmission Test and FTIR-Spectroscopy) were affected only marginally. Trends of H/C, O/C, Light Transmittance and FTIR absorbance spectra versus storage time, following initial 1 Coke quality of PCE treated sample had appreciably poorer quality ambient (ASTM, IRSID, JIS tumbler tests) and hot (CSR, CRI) coke strength and modified coke structure compared to untreated sample. In fact, coke ASTM strength for untreated and treated coal at time 1 Comparison of 1 The authors gratefully acknowledge the