Dry powder aerosol deposition (AD) potentially offers several advantages over conventional ceramic coating processes. AD takes place at room temperature, and a variety of materials can be utilized as the substrate. Deposition occurs at a relatively rapid rate, and the product is a dense, nano-crystalline thick film. One limitation for AD is related to the suitability of powders. In addition to the many other process variables, the success of the deposition depends on the starting powder and its preparation, determined by trial and error. In this work, a broad experimental study about the suitability of 14 alumina powders for AD was carried out on two different substrates, alumina and glass. Three powder properties, particle size, d
                     50, specific surface area, S
                     BET, and compressibility index, CI, were measured and associated with the success of the subsequent deposition. For alumina substrates (high hardness), it was found that a relatively high powder specific surface area (5.5–8 m2/g) correlated with good film deposition and adhesion. For glass substrates, initial deposition was obtained with almost all powders; however, problem with long term stability, apparently related to residual strain, was witnessed using many powders. Hi quality, well-adhered, stable AD films in this case were associated with comparatively lower S
                     BET and a compressibility index within a tight range of about 44–47%.The “Aerosol Deposition” (AD) method is a novel technique to deposit ceramic coatings with a wide range of thicknesses, from sub-micron to several hundred microns. Dense, nano-crystalline ceramic films result from the “room temperature impact consolidation” (RTIC) of dry powders A basic AD apparatus consists of an aerosol generator, a deposition chamber and a vacuum pump ( A major challenge for AD is the dependence of the resulting film quality on the initial powder and its preparation. Even when other process parameters are optimized, unsuitable powders only build chalk-like films A wide range of powders with particles sizes ( As a standard preparation for AD, each alumina powder was wet ground for 4 The AD of these alumina powders was performed using a custom-made apparatus as previously reported in Film quality after deposition was given a qualitative classification with regard to initial deposition, adhesion/delamination, and long term (2  After preparation, all powders are located well above that line, and the range of powder properties is narrowed with the majority of particles exhibiting Example SEM micrographs illustrate the differences among powders and the changes that occurred during preparation. Powder No. 1 (  In contrast, deposition on glass substrates is possible for almost all tested powders, at least initially. All films are uniform and free of visible delamination after deposition. Differences emerge only in varying film thicknesses and roughness, and associated with these, a different visual appearance like transparency and color (tone of gray). But, as seen in   Akedo’s group has stated that during the first scan(s), an anchoring layer is formed on the substrate surface The outcomes on glass were completely different than on alumina substrates. Again, all powders were capable of AD on glass in the first place. All films appeared homogeneous and withstood a pull test using Scotch tape. However, after long-term storage of 2 Accordingly, this set of experiments required a different rating scheme as described in In contrast to alumina substrates, softer glass substrates (Mohs hardness We speculate that the powders with a larger amount of nano-sized primary particles, which were successful on alumina substrates (Nos. 12, 13, 14) were not successful on glass because the powder particles themselves did not fracture, nor were they embedded to form a strong anchoring layer. We also presume that the large particle powders are more likely to create large surface flaws, An empirical study investigating the suitability of alumina powders for successful aerosol deposition (AD) was conducted using a large number and range of commercial powders. Not only the nature of the powder, but also the nature of the substrate was shown to be influential, with cross-over or higher order effects. Hard alumina substrates required powders with a relatively high surface area, The findings for glass substrates were different. In this case, alumina powder with lower Although the specific values reported here are likely only applicable to alumina powder, it has been shown that conventional powder tests may be used as a predictor for the aerosol deposition process. M. Hahn and J. Exner were responsible for and executed the measurements, supported by M. Schubert and D. Hanft. P. Fuierer and R. Moos supervised the work and were the leaders of technical discussions and manuscript preparation. The authors are indebted to Mrs. Mergner for preparation of the SEM samples and Mrs. Haider (Bayreuth Institute of Macromolecular Research) for SEM imaging. Funding of a Mercator Fellowship by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft,