Based on experimental and in-situ tests, the propagation and attenuation rules of seismic wave in the intact and jointed rocks subjected to conventional triaxial loading condition were investigated, especially the influencing effects of joints and beddings on the attenuation. Meanwhile, the frequency-spectrum evolutions during the process of attenuation were analysed in detail. To verify the outcomes obtained from the laboratory, the attenuation characteristics of seismic wave generated by blasting in underground strata were tested, and the attenuation rules by the joints between strata was summarized. Finally, the seismic response of joints and beddings in rocks was revealed. This work put forward some references for early weakening and controlling coal-rock dynamic disasters triggered by seismic wave in coal mines based on the attenuation effect of artificial discontinuity such as joint and bedding.Fractured rocks significantly influence the geotechnical stability of a site, and the heterogeneities on different scales, such as fractures, joints and micro-cracks, can vary, or are altered by artificial interferences. As the physical properties of discontinuities change in time, active monitoring techniques should be improved to quantify the variations in the fractured rocks. It is well known that microseism (MS) and acoustic emission (AE) can accurately locate fractures and characterize the mechanical properties of fractured rocks, but the further development was hampered due to the lack of understanding of the relationships and interaction among the physical properties of fractures. Recently, some attempts have been conducted to investigate and reveal the physical properties of fractures including seismic response based on field and laboratory studies. An initial fracture in rock consists of two contact rough surfaces. From elasticity, the mechanical stiffness of a fracture depends on the spatial distribution and the amount of contact area within a fracture As summarized above, the mechanical characteristics of a fractured rock with discontinuities have been extensively investigated, and the propagation and attenuation rules of seismic wave through a fracture with different mechanical properties have been also clearly revealed. However, even though the attenuation rules generated by joint have been fruitfully investigated in lab, limited attention has been paid to characterizing the attenuation effect of seismic wave by bedding and coupled attenuation by both joint and bedding Thus, understanding the coupled attenuation effect by both beddings and joints using a triaxial acoustic P-S1-S2 system and identifying the frequency-spectrum evolution of seismic wave is of vital importance. In this paper, we first presented a survey of our current understanding of these interrelationships wave velocity, frequency-spectrum distribution and discontinuities including bedding and joint based on experimental and in-situ tests. Secondly, the attenuation differences by joint and bedding in rocks were discussed in detail. Furthermore, the outcomes obtained from experiments were verified from the field investigation. The test facilities at the Lassonde Institute of Mining, University of Toronto were used and a Hoek type triaxial cell with axial linear variable differential transformers (LVDTs) and data acquisition module (as shown in In total, three sandstone samples were prepared, with dimension of 35 mm in diameter and 78 mm in height, and with two joints oriented orthogonal to the long axis of the core except the #1 sample. They were tested to investigate the wave velocity and seismic responses of joints and beddings. The three samples were processed from two types of sandstone with the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of 52.63 MPa and 57.32 MPa, and the modulus of elasticity of 17.86 GPa and 21.35 GPa, respectively. As for the seismic measurements, the intact #1 sample, which was taken immediately adjacent to the jointed samples from the same core, was also tested to provide references and comparison.  From  Based on previous investigations, the effect of the joint is distributed throughout the bulk and the discreteness of the joint is lost. Therefore, a seismic reduction in velocity is observed. In In order to describe the relationship between stress and seismic wave velocity in rocks, the following empirical expression has been summarized using a large number of experiments The propagation and attenuation effects of single fracture on seismic wave have been verified fruitfully both in lab and by field tests. However, how seismic waves respond needs further experimental investigations considering double influencing factors including stress and joints. The intact #1 sample without cracks Based on the Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT) of seismic signals, the frequency-spectrum evolutions of P & S1-wave of the #1 sample with different axial stress were analysed, as shown in Based on spectrum analysis, the frequency-spectrum distribution characteristics of S1 & S2-wave were basically similar. Therefore, we only discuss the S1-wave here. From The jointed #2 sample with two joints  From The jointed #3 sample with two joints and beddings  From To sum up, it was found that as stress on the jointed sample was increased, the amount of energy transmitted across the joint increased, which was observed as an increase in magnitude or the spectral peak of seismic wave. In addition, the spectral peak shifted to higher frequency with the increase of the axial stress. However, the macroscopic joints produced significant attenuation effect on the P-wave, and the spectral peak was converted from high to low frequencies. The inclined beddings attenuated the S-wave to a certain extent, and the spectrum manifested wide frequency with abundant low frequency components. As stress on the jointed sample increased, the joint stiffness increased, resulting in an increase in transmission across the joint, and thus the receiving wave manifested abundant high-frequency characteristics. At very high stresses, the joint behaves similar to that of the intact sample. In contrast, the slip and fracture may be produced along the inclined beddings under high stress, which will strengthen the attenuation effect on seismic wave. Both in-situ and laboratory investigations on artificially and naturally fractured rocks have shown that they exhibit frequency-dependent transmission losses  From  From The displacement discontinuity structure yields transmission and reflection coefficients that depend on the specific stiffness of the structure,  From  From When the fracture stiffness approaches 0 ( The following four points were summarized: (1) the attenuation of horizontal joints on seismic wave velocity is very significant, but that of inclined beddings is not obvious, especially for S-wave; (2) for the intact sample, the P-wave attenuation is obvious, and the low-frequency signal is strong. The attenuation of S-wave is not obvious, and the spectrum mainly distributes in the high-frequency band. For the jointed sample, the attenuation of P-wave is significant, and the low-frequency signal is enhanced. However, the attenuation of S-wave is not obvious manifesting dominantly high-frequency characteristics. On the basis of joint, the bedding further attenuates the P-wave, while the attenuation effect for S-wave is relatively weak. When the stress is high, the beddings may generate slip and fracture, which is equivalent to forming new joints aggravating the attenuation; (3) the joints attenuate the high-frequency signals of P-wave, and the low frequency components are enhanced. However, the spectrum still shows wide frequency characteristics. The attenuation of S-wave mainly concentrates in high frequency band, and that of low frequency is not obvious. The beddings further attenuate the P-wave after propagating through joints, and thus the high frequency signals are weakened significantly with low frequency characteristics. The attenuation of the beddings on S-wave is weaker than that on P-wave, and the attenuation index decreases significantly; and (4) for the intact sample, the higher the stress is, the weaker the attenuation of signal is, and the high frequency is more abundant. For the jointed sample, the attenuation effect of stress on both P and S-wave is not obvious. Field investigation on propagation and attenuation effects of joints between rock layers on seismic wave generated by blasting was carried out in a tailentry of a working face characterized by strong rockburst danger. The average elevation of the tailentry was approximately −840 m, and total of three three-component geophones named as #1, #3 and #4 were arranged around the tailentry. The frequency response of the geophone is 5–500 Hz, and the sampling rate is 1000 sps. The absolute time error of GPS clock is less than 1 ms with trigger recording mode, and seismic events with M From  In-situ test 1: After blasting with five blast holes and total explosive charge of 15 kg in the tailentry, the clear seismic waveforms were received and recorded by the three geophones. The propagation distances of the seismic wave to the explosive source to the #1, #3 and #4 geophones were 249.5 m, 1306 m and 986.6 m, respectively. From From In-situ test 2: After blasting with six blast holes and total explosive charge of 15 kg in the tailentry, the clear seismic waveforms were received and recorded by the three geophones. The propagation distances of #1, #3 and #4 geophones to the explosive source were 315 m, 1371.5 m, and 920 m, respectively. Totally, the results of the second test were similar to that of the first test. The amplitude of seismic wave decreased gradually with propagation, the high frequency signals weakened, and the low frequency signals strengthened gradually, as shown in From In summary, the results of field investigations on seismic wave propagation and attenuation in the jointed rock are as follows: (1) with propagation of seismic wave, the high frequency signals attenuate significantly, and the spectrum moves from high-frequency band to low-frequency band. Especially, the joints have significant attenuation effect on P-wave, and while the attenuation effect on S-wave is not obvious; and (2) the attenuation index of P-wave is obviously higher than that of S-wave by horizontal joints. The horizontal propagation distance has little effect on attenuation of P-wave, which is closely related to vertical propagation distance and especially the number of the experienced joints. In addition, the horizontal propagation distance has a certain effect on the attenuation of S-wave. The conclusions drawn from the experiments and in-situ tests were in good agreement with each other. The attenuation index of P-wave was obviously higher than that of S-wave by horizontal joints, the high frequency signals of P-wave significantly weakened, and the frequency spectrum evolved from high frequency to low frequency accompanied with unobvious attenuation of S-wave. Additionally, the joints attenuated the high-frequency signals of P-wave and the low frequency components were enhanced according to the experiments, while the spectrum still showed wide frequency characteristics, and the attenuation of joints on S-wave mainly concentrated in high frequency band. In the field observation, the horizontal propagation distance had little effect on the attenuate of P-wave, while it has a certain effect on the attenuation of S-wave. First, the propagation and attenuation rules of seismic wave in the intact and jointed rocks subjected to conventional triaxial loading condition were investigated experimentally, especially the effects of joints and beddings on the attenuation. Secondly, the attenuation characteristics of seismic wave generated by blasting in underground strata are in-situ tested, and the attenuation rules by the joints between strata is analysed. The following main conclusions are drawn: Joint can significantly reduce the velocity of seismic wave in rocks. Although bedding can attenuate the intensity of the P and S-wave, the attenuation effect on wave velocity is not obvious. For horizontal joint, it can’t obviously attenuate the vertically propagating S-wave. The inclined bedding further reduces P-wave on basis of attenuation generated by the joint, and the spectrum moves to low frequency band. For sample without artificially manufactured joint, the higher the applied stress is, the weaker the attenuation effect of seismic signal is, and the higher the corresponding dominant frequency is. For jointed sample, the effect of stress on P and S-wave attenuation is not significant. The higher the applied stress is, the weaker the attenuation effect by bedding is, and the stronger the low frequency signal is. Additionally, the attenuation effect of the bedding on S-wave is weaker compared with P-wave. Based on the field investigation, joint has significant attenuation effect on seismic P-wave, but it is not obvious on S-wave, verifying the outcomes obtained from the lab. The horizontal propagation distance has little effect on the attenuation of P-wave, which is closely related to vertical propagation distance, especially the number of the experienced joints. We gratefully wish to acknowledge the collaborative funding support from the