The separation of nickel has been carried out from a waste solution containing 3.18g/L Ni with other impurities such as Fe, Zn, Cu and As. Iron was removed by precipitation and Cu and Zn were removed by solvent extraction using LIX 622N and NaTOPS-99, respectively. After removal of all these impurities nickel was extracted by 1.5M NaTOPS-99 in two counter-current stages at A:O ratio of 3:1 and the loaded organic was stripped with 30g/L H2SO4 at phase ratio of unity. The strip solution of nickel was treated with Al2(NO)3
                     ·9H2O for co-precipitation by increasing the pH of solution with 1M NaOH up to 10. The Ni–Al layered double hydroxide was confirmed through XRD characterization.The demand of nickel has been increasing day by day because of its use in various products such as electronic devices, magnets, rechargeable batteries, stainless steel, super alloy coins and catalysts. So any waste containing nickel should be treated for recovery of nickel. In the copper plant, during electropurification of copper, the bleed stream obtained from liberated cell contains significant amount of Cu, Ni, H Solvent extraction is the most suitable technique to obtain pure Ni from a mixed solution. Many authors have worked on extraction of Ni using various extractants such as D2EHPA ( The layered double hydroxides (LDHs), also known as anionic clays or hydrotalcite (HT)-like constitute a family of layered materials where Mg After recovery of valuable metals from the bleed streams of copper refining plant the solution is sent to the effluent treatment plant. But this solution also contains 2–3 The commercial extractant TOPS-99 which is di-(2-ethyl hexyl) phosphoric acid was obtained from Heavy Water Plant, Talcher, Odisha, India. Tri A digital Systronics μpH Meter Model 361 provided with a combined glass electrode was used to measure the pH of aqueous solutions. The metal ion concentration in aqueous solution was measured by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (Perkin–Elmer Model AAnalyst-200). The mixer-settler unit used in this work was a box-type mixer-settlers made of PVDF. The active volume of one mixer-settler or stage was 600 The extractant, TOPS-99 was neutralized up to 70% by intimately mixing it with stoichiometric quantity of concentrated NaOH solution to form a single phase and was used as extractant. Tri The solution of spent electrolyte contains 3.18 The waste solution of the bleed stream was treated with lime for removal of iron and neutralisation of acid. The initial pH of the solution was 0.61. This solution was taken in a beaker and Ca(OH) The filtrate after iron precipitation contains 0.26 After separation of iron and copper, zinc was extracted using NaTOPS-99. The concentration of zinc was also very less which could be separated by single stage extraction using NaTOPS-99. But the bleed stream of copper refining plant contained Ni also which might be co-extracted with zinc. So to minimize the co-extraction of Ni, extractant concentration was optimized and McCabe–Thiele diagram was constructed for zinc extraction. The effect of extractant concentration on extraction of zinc was studied by varying the concentration of NaTOPS-99 from 0.01 to 0.2 To know the number of stages and A/O phase ratio for zinc extraction, the McCabe–Thiele plot was constructed with 0.1 Both the extraction and the stripping sections for zinc consisted of 2 stages and the operating conditions were so chosen that the residence time in each stage of the mixer was 5 The effect of equilibrium pH on extraction of nickel from the Fe, Cu and Zn- free solution was carried out using of 0.2 The plot of log As the maximum percentage of extraction was obtained at pH 4.5 (equilibrium pH 5.8), further experiments were carried out at this pH. To study the effect of extractant concentration on extraction of nickel, experiments were carried out with different concentration of NaTOPS-99 (0.05–1.5 To optimize the condition with respect to phase ratio and number of stages required for the quantitative extraction of nickel from Fe–Cu–Zn-free solution, the McCabe–Thiele plot was constructed with 1.5 The loaded organic was stripped with different concentration of H To the strip solution containing 8.69 The recovery of nickel was carried out from a waste solution containing Ni, Fe, Cu, Zn and As. Before separation of other metal ions, iron was precipitated from the solution by addition of lime at pH 2.5. After precipitation of iron, copper was separated with 5% LIX 622 The authors wish to thank Prof. B.K. Mishra, Director, CSIR – Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology, Bhubaneswar and Dr. I.N. Bhattacharya, HOD, Hydro & Electrometallurgy Department for their kind permission to publish this paper.