It is known that the price of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) is higher than that of natural gas from which it is derived. So the modification of a natural gas plant to produce LPG instead of lighter hydrocarbon gases is very important in the view point of economics. The aim of the present work is directed to the modification of Salam gas plant (Khalda Petroleum Company-Egypt) to produce LPG from the NGL instead of producing hydrocarbon gases during the NGL stabilization. This can be achieved after adding de-ethanizer and de-butanizer towers. The simulation tool used in this study is HYSYS version 8.4. The produced LPG of 100ton/day can participate to solve the LPG shortage problem in Egypt and provide a national service to the people of Matruh Governorate. The economic study based on the economic analyzer of HYSIS showed that the pay-back period of the added two towers and their additional equipment has a high investment strength which means that all modification costs will be recovered within a short time. Furthermore, there are other benefits from this modification. The simulation results showed that there is a capacity saving of 56tons/day in the export pipeline which transfers the gases to western desert gas complex (WDGC) at Alexandria. In the same manner, the modified plant provides a capacity saving of 88tons/day in the dehydration unit and reduces horse power consumption in recycle and first stage export compressors. This modification can be taken as guidelines for both new and plants in operation to increase their profits.Natural gas obtained from gas or oil wells is a mixture of many hydrocarbon gases and some non-hydrocarbon gases, mainly hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and water vapor. These non-hydrocarbon gases are normally removed from natural gas or, at least, their concentration is highly reduced, to meet a target level based on pipeline or processing contract terms. After purification (sweetening and dehydration), most of natural gas is ready for natural gas liquid recovery Propane plus (C Cryogenic plants operate at temperatures below −100 Refrigeration technique is more common for NGL recovery from gas streams. The recovered fractions are fractionated to get the desired products The process which dominates ethane recovery facility design is the turbo expander process. This process uses the feed gas pressure to produce needed refrigeration by expansion across a turbine (turbo expander). The turbo expander recovers useful work from this gas expansion. Because the expansion is near isentropic, the turbo expander lowers the gas temperature drop significantly more than expansion across a J–T valve  Gas from the inlet separator and from the recycle compressor discharge cooler are combined and sent to the mercury removal system. Mercury removal vessel reduces the mercury content from 270 The dehydrated gas goes for dew point treatment. Saturated gas at a temperature of 48 The inlet to the second stage separator is a condensate stream, which is a mixture of condensate from the inlet separator and the raw condensate from the slug catcher. The second stage separator is a horizontal three phase separator that operates at 24.5 The proposed modification to the above described plant aims to maximize the condensate production by producing LPG. This can be achieved by adding a de-ethanizer and a de-butanizer fractionating towers to replace the stabilizer unit to separate LPG from the NGL and condensate out of the turbo expanders and desalters respectively without affecting the operating condition of the plant. The produced LPG can be used as housing fuel for Matrouh Governorate and then partially solve the problem of shortage of housing fuel in Egypt. The commercially available software ASPEN HYSYS version 8.4 was used in this work to model the gas plant under investigation. The ping–Ropson equation of state has been used for this purpose as it is claimed to be well suited for high-pressure non-ideal system The de-ethanizer column shown in The bottom of the de-ethanizer is sent to the cooler for decreasing the temperature to 100 The debutanizer column was simulated as a distillation column with 25 From the simulation results, LPG flow rate is 100.8 ton /day which is sufficient for the quantity of LPG consumed in Matruh Governorate. The composition of the bottom product of the debutanizer is shown in Total capital and operating costs are obtained by using the economic analyzer of Aspen HYSYS version 8.4. The economic evaluation module develops both capital and utility costs. The following costs have been considered for the calculation of the project capital cost Direct costs which refer to material and labor costs for equipment, piping, civil, structural steel, instrumentation and controls, electrical equipment and materials, insulation and paint. Indirect field costs such as engineering and supervision, start-up and commissioning, construction expenses, fringe benefits, burdens, insurance, scaffolding, equipment rental, field services, temporary constructions, etc. Indirect non-field costs as described below: Freight, taxes and permits, engineering (Basic engineering, detailed engineering, and material procurement). Contingency – allowances for unpredictable events. Other project costs such as general and administrative expenses, contract fees, and home office expenses. Utility Cost was determined by the economic module based on the appropriate process utility fluids selected either by the user or by the sizing expert from the list of 21 default utility streams already present in the system. Once the utility resources are selected, the utility cost for every utility resource used in the project is determined during the operating cost evaluation The calculated total capital and total operating costs obtained by HYSYS economic module are 8,432,650 The simulated gross heating values obtained by HYSIS simulator for the produced gas is decreased from 1028 BTU/MMSCF for the original plant to 1021 BTU/MMSCF for the modified plant. This can be attributed to the reduction of heavier hydrocarbons in the gas stream produced from the de-ethanizer in the modified plant which is recovered as LPG in the debutanizer. The gas selling price is 2.65  The return on investment (ROI) and payback period of the modified plant is calculated according to the following equations: NGLs producing plants require continuous adaptation in process technologies and suitable selection of operating conditions in order to increase their profits. Thus, this research work aims to produce LPG from Salam gas located in Egypt to increase the production of valuable NGLs. This can be done by the addition of deethanizer and debutanizer fractionating towers to replace the stabilizer unit and separate LPG instead of producing lighter hydrocarbon gases during stabilization. The feed to these added towers are the NGL out of the turbo expander and condensate from the desalter that feed the existing stabilizer unit. A comparison of the Salam gas plant before and after modification is made using the simulation package of HYSYS-8.4. The results indicate that the modified plant can produce 100 LPG transportation cost can be reduced by using the produced LPG to feed near cities. This is good from the view point of economics as well as eliminating the risk from road transportation of bottled gas from Alexandria to Matrough through trucks. There is a capacity saving of 56 Reduction in the power consumption for the 1st stage export, 1st and 2nd stage recycle, and turbo expander compressors can be achieved.