Vertebral fractures are very common and primarily affect the thoracolumbar spine as the result of an isolated injury or in polytrauma patients. The majority of these fractures can be treated non-operatively. Surgical stabilization of thoracolumbar fractures may be indicated after high-energy trauma or in the multiply injured patient. Surgery aims to provide a stable spinal column to allow early mobilization and optimize neurological outcome. This article considers the principles of clinical assessment and decision-making in the surgical management of thoracolumbar fractures. The AO spine thoracolumbar classification system can be used to guide treatment because the choice of surgical strategy depends on the biomechanics of the injury. Most injuries can be stabilized through a posterior approach but anterior column reconstruction can be performed, either as a stand-alone procedure or in order to support a posterior stabilization. The use of minimally invasive techniques is discussed. Interventional spinal technologies for osteoporotic vertebral compression fractures are also considered.Surgical treatment of thoracolumbar fractures may be required after high-energy injuries or in a polytrauma patient. Clinical and radiological assessment of the patient is required in order to evaluate whether the spine is unstable. Unstable injuries include fracture/dislocations, flexion/distraction injuries and some thoracolumbar burst fractures. In these patients, surgery aims to stabilize the spine in order to minimize pain, reduce the risk of neurological deterioration and assist with early nursing care, mobilization and rehabilitation. Neurological deficits are often seen in patients sustaining a high-energy injury in which case surgery offers an opportunity to try and optimize their neurological outcome. Surgical intervention for low-energy fractures is also possible, with cement augmentation offering potential improvement in pain, function and quality of life. The evolution of spinal implants and interventional technologies has led to an increasing popularity of surgical treatment and various contrasting approaches to reconstruct the spine. The choice of surgical strategy depends on an understanding of the deforming forces applied as a fracture occurs and the biomechanical requirements for a successful reconstruction. Surgical treatment of patients with vertebral column fractures has become much more common over the last 50 years as spinal instrumentation has been safer to use and more readily available. Hadra Decision-making around surgical reconstruction for thoracolumbar fractures is based on good understanding of spinal biomechanics and the pathomechanics of injury. The function of the vertebral column is to protect the spinal cord and facilitate the transfer of loads in order to provide stability during movement of the upper and lower extremities. Following a spinal injury these functions may be interrupted and surgery can offer a way of protecting the neurological structures, realigning the anatomy and providing stability to allow early mobilization and rehabilitation. Stability in the spine has been defined as ‘the ability of the spine under physiological loads to limit patterns of displacement so as not to damage or irritate the spinal cord or nerve roots, and in addition to prevent incapacitating deformity or pain due to structural changes’. The basic mechanical model for the spine is to consider it to consist of two columns: the anterior column including the vertebral bodies, discs and ligaments and the posterior column including the facet joints and posterior ligamentous complex. During normal standing and ambulation, the anterior column is under axial load with compression occurring across the vertebrae and intervertebral discs. The posterior column is intermittently under compression and tension and can be considered as a posterior ‘tension band’. Approximately 80% of load transfer occurs across the anterior and 20% through the posterior column during normal standing. The classification of spinal fractures in a clinical setting has traditionally considered the spine as a series of columns. Holdsworth The AO Spine Thoracolumbar Classification system There are no absolute indications for surgical intervention in patients with a vertebral column injury. Spinal fractures are often seen in the multiply injured patient or in patients with significant comorbidities. The presence of a neurological injury must also be considered. These factors need to be included in the decision- making process. Surgery is strongly recommended in the following settings: Fracture/dislocation of the spine – in this situation there is minimal bony contact and non-operative methods are unlikely to produce a stable column. These are AO type C fractures. The polytrauma patient – in patients with failure of the anterior or posterior column surgical stabilization can help to allow early mobilization. Obtunded patients – stabilization may be required to prevent an uncooperative patient from moving uncontrollably and causing further neurological damage. Outside of these patient groups surgery should be offered if it is perceived to provide a benefit in terms of pain relief, early mobilization, shorter hospital stay, lower rate of complications or lead to an improvement in the degree of deformity caused by the injury. This must be weighed against the potential complications of surgery. In order to help with this decision-making, Vaccaro et al.    In addition to these indications there will also be patients where conservative treatment has been attempted and has been unsuccessful. Patients can be left with pain or stiffness due to non-union or residual deformity in the coronal or sagittal plane. Augmentation of the vertebra with cement can be used to reduce pain in both the acute phase and in an established non-union, both of which are discussed below. Surgery to correct a fixed deformity requires complex techniques which may include a posterior based osteotomy or vertebral column resection. Surgery is performed with the patient prone on a radiolucent table using either a Wilson frame or pelvic pads and a chest bar. There is more likely to be a kyphotic deformity and so the pads and bar will allow the deformity to partially correct. If there is a lordotic deformity the Wilson frame will produce some kyphosis and help reduce the fracture. More often the choice of support depends on surgeon preference. Pressure points must be checked and particular attention paid to the eyes, axillae and knees. A midline skin incision is followed by sub-muscular approach to the posterior elements. Pedicle screws are placed above and below the fracture site after a position check with the image intensifier. Fracture reduction depends on the pattern of injury. Reduction of AO type A fractures can be achieved with the AO spinal fracture set or with monoaxial screws. To achieve correction there should be fixation points only one level above and one level below the fracture. Straight rods are inserted on each side and secured onto the screws using the mobile connector (AO set) or into the tulip with loose locking screws. The anterior vertebral height and kyphosis angle can then be restored by applying lordosis posteriorly and distraction between the screws allows the posterior vertebral body height to be restored. This manoeuvre allows the fracture fragments to realign by ligamentotaxis and leads to a good anatomical reduction. Reduction of AO type B1 and B2 fractures is more straightforward with monoaxial screws above and below the injury ( Decompression of the posterior elements can be performed alongside the stabilization. This may be indicated if there is neurological compression clinically or radiologically or if there are concerns that reduction of the fracture may produce neural compression. The presence of neurological deficits is not an absolute indication for decompression as the time of neurological injury is most likely to be at the time when the fracture occurred. There is no ideal construct when performing a posterior stabilization. Using screws above and below the fracture site allows for an easier reduction and the use of ligamentotaxis at the fracture site. There is also the advantage of reducing the number of segments involved in the fixation. However, when there is significant disruption of the anterior column this type of ‘short segment’ construct does not provide adequate stability. A longer segment construct is then required, or support from an additional anterior column reconstruction. Supplementary short screws at the fractured level may provide some stability and cross links can be added to increase stiffness of the construct. Augmented pedicle screws (cement augmentation applied at the time of screw insertion) or cortical trajectory screws can also be used to increase pull-out strength at the bone–screw interface. None of these techniques have been shown to provide a clinical advantage but are increasingly being used in an effort to improve spinal stability and preserve motion segments. Most open fracture reduction occurs alongside a fusion of the posterior elements. The facet joints involved in the fusion mass are removed and bone graft is placed in the facets and across the midline along the length of the construct. Where there has been a decompression, the graft can be placed lateral to the facets and onto decorticated transverse processes. Although a fusion is most often performed it is sometimes preferable to stabilize the fracture without a formal fusion. This may be an option in younger patients where preservation of motion is a treatment priority. In this situation the instrumentation should be removed after 6–12 months. Anterior surgery should be considered where there is primary loss of stability in the anterior column. This can occur in AO types A4, B or C fractures where there is significant comminution or angulation. Anterior reconstruction can occur as a stand-alone procedure or alongside a posterior stabilization ( The choice of approach for thoracolumbar fractures remains controversial and it is difficult to apply evidence-based medicine due to the number of surgical treatment options and the heterogeneity of fracture patterns. Decision-making should be made based on the patient and the mode of failure of the vertebral column. The experience of the surgeon and availability of support from allied specialties (including vascular and general surgery) should also be considered. Patient outcomes are better when a surgeon is regularly performing an approach and technique for reconstruction. A recent meta-analysis comparing the two approaches showed no difference in neurological recovery or deformity correction. Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) techniques are common in spinal surgery and certainly have a role in the treatment of vertebral column injuries. Mini-open lateral approaches adopted from degenerative and adult deformity surgery can be used to achieve MIS reconstruction of the anterior column. One- or two-level corpectomy can be performed in this way and expandable cage technology can be used during reconstruction. Wide edge loading endplates are now available in an attempt to minimize the risk of cage subsidence. These advances in medical device technology have led to a rapid expansion of the indications for MIS fracture surgery. Long-term outcome data are not yet available. Most of the fracture patterns considered in this article occur as a result of high energy injury. There are a large number of patients that suffer spinal fractures as a result of low-energy injury due to an insufficiency fracture in osteoporotic bone, typically AO type A1 fractures. These are incredibly common fractures and almost all are treated with non-operative management but can have a negative impact on quality of life, physical function and mental health. Percutaneous augmentation of the vertebral body with cement (vertebroplasty) is an established treatment for painful osteoporotic compression fractures but is extremely controversial due to the volume of conflicting high-quality evidence surrounding its efficacy. In 2009, two landmark prospective, randomized, double-blinded, placebo controlled studies comparing vertebroplasty to a sham procedure were published. Surgical stabilization of fractures is often required after high-energy trauma. Clinical evaluation and radiological imaging should include CT and MRI in order to assess the degree of bony and ligamentous injury. An assessment of spinal stability should be made with fractures classified using the AO spine thoracolumbar classification system and TLICS score. Surgical treatment is required for AO type C injuries (fracture/dislocations) and for most AO type B injuries (flexion/distraction injuries). Split fractures (AO type A2) and burst fractures (AO type A3 and A4) may also be treated with surgical stabilization. Reconstruction options include posterior and anterior reduction with instrumentation and fusion, or a combined approach. Choice of strategy depends on the biomechanics of the injury. Urgent surgery (within 24 hours) is required in the presence of an acute spinal cord injury. In the lumbar spine, decompression can be performed but this is not time dependant and it is not associated with improvement in neurological outcome. Minimally invasive techniques can be employed and the indications are expanding. Surgical treatment of osteoporotic vertebral insufficiency fractures is also evolving and there is likely to be a subset of patients who would benefit from vertebral augmentation after sustaining AO type A1 fractures.