This chapter describes production of Cu-rich sulfide concentrate (∼30% Cu) from finely ground ore. Copper sulfide ores must be concentrated before they can be economically transported and smelted. The universal technique for this concentration is froth flotation of finely ground ore. Froth flotation entails attaching fine Cu-sulfide mineral particles to bubbles and floating them out of a water–ore mixture. The flotation is made selective by using reagents, which make the Cu-sulfide minerals water-repellant (hydrophobic) while leaving the other minerals wetted (hydrophilic). Typical Cu sulfide recoveries to concentrate are 85–90%. Typical concentrate grades are 30% Cu (higher with chalcocite, bornite, and native copper mineralization). Column flotation cleaner cells are particularly effective at giving a high Cu grade in the concentrate. Modern concentrators are automatically controlled to give maximum Cu recovery, maximum % Cu in the concentrate, and maximum ore throughput rate at minimum cost. Expert control systems help to optimize the performance of flotation plants. On-stream particle size and on-stream X-ray fluorescence analyses are key components of this automatic control. The indispensable tool for Cu concentrate production is Sulfide minerals are normally wetted by water ( Cu-sulfide minerals can selectively be made hydrophobic by their interaction with the collector, leaving other minerals wetted. Collisions between ~1 mm diameter rising air bubbles and the now water-repellent Cu minerals result in attachment of the Cu mineral particles to the bubbles ( The still-wetted non-copper mineral particles do not attach to the rising bubbles and remain in the slurry. Industrially, the process entails (a) conditioning a water–ore mixture ( The last step in the flotation process is creating a strong but short-lived froth by adding A sequence of flotation cells is designed to optimize Cu recovery and the Cu grade in the concentrate ( The reagents (collectors), which create the water-repellent surfaces on sulfide minerals are heteropolar molecules. They have a polar (charged) end and a non-polar (hydrocarbon) end. They attach their polar (charged) end to the mineral surface (which is itself polar), leaving the non-polar hydrocarbon end extended outwards ( A commonly used collector is xanthate, e.g.: Other sulfur-containing molecules, particularly dithiophosphates, mercaptans, and thionocarbamates, are also used. Commercial collectors are often blends of several of these reagents ( The simplest froth flotation separation are that of sulfide minerals from waste oxide minerals, such as andesite, granodiorite, and granite. It uses collectors which, when Separating sulfide minerals, such as chalcopyrite from pyrite, is somewhat more complex. It relies on modifying the surfaces of non-Cu sulfides so that the collector does not attach to them while still attaching to Cu sulfides. The most common This graph shows that: Up to pH 5 (acid slurry), CuFeS Between pH 5 and pH 7.5 (neutral slurry), CuFeS Between pH 7.5 and pH 10.5 (basic slurry), only CuFeS A bulk Pb–Cu sulfide concentrate could therefore be produced by flotation at pH 6.5. The Pb and Cu sulfides could then be separated at pH 9, which occurs after addition of more CaO. The modifying effect of OH Collectors and modifiers give selective flotation of Cu minerals from non-Cu minerals. Branched-chain alcohols are the most common frothers ( Frothers stabilize the froth by absorbing their OH Selective flotation of Cu-sulfide minerals (chalcopyrite, chalcocite, bornite) from oxide rock and Fe-sulfide minerals (mainly pyrite) is usually done with xanthate, dithiophosphate, mercaptan, or thionocarbamate collectors; burnt lime (CaO) for pH (OH The flowsheet in The The The The The froths from the rougher–scavengers and cleaner–scavengers are ground before being sent to the cleaners ( The rougher–scavenger and cleaner–scavenger cells are designed to maximize Cu recovery to concentrate. The cleaner and re-cleaner cells maximize concentrate grade. Circuits such as that in  Many new Cu flotation plants use column cells for cleaner flotation (  Modern flotation plants are equipped with sensors and automatic control systems ( Ore particle size after grinding and regrinding ( % Cu, % solids, pH, and mass flowrate of the process streams (especially the input and output streams); Froth height in the flotation cells. Impeller speeds and air input rates in the flotation cells are also often sensed. The adjustments made on the basis of the sensor readings are: Water flow rates into hydrocyclone feed sumps to control grinding recycle, and thus flotation feed (ore) particle size; Flotation reagent (collector, frother, and depressant) and water addition rates throughout the flotation plant; Slurry level in the flotation cells, by adjusting the underflow valves in each cell. Of particular importance in flotation control is continuous measurement of Cu concentration in the solids of the process streams. This is typically done by X-ray fluorescence analysis, which may be accomplished by either sending samples to a central X-ray analysis unit or by using small X-ray units in the process streams themselves. The analyses are often done by fixed-crystal wavelength-dispersive spectrometry ( These analyses are used to monitor and optimize plant performance by automatically controlling (for example) reagent addition rates, grind size, and flotation cell operation. In modern plants, the control is done by a supervisory computer ( Advanced mineralogical techniques are also being more commonly employed to improve the performance and control of flotation circuits ( Several large concentrators have installed machine vision systems on their flotation cells (Metso, 2010). These systems determine froth quality and froth overflow rate. They are used to automatically adjust grind size, reagent addition rates, and froth depth, to maximize Cu recovery in their rougher and scavenger cells and Cu grade in their cleaner and re-cleaner cells ( Freeport's Grasberg concentrator installed 172 machine vision systems. These systems and new process strategies increased Cu-to-concentrate recovery by several percent ( The product from flotation contains ~75 mass% water, most of which must be removed before the concentrate can be transported and smelted. Most of this The underflows from the thickeners still contain 30–40% water. This is reduced to 10–15% in rotary vacuum filters and then further reduced to 8% in pressure filters or ceramic-disc vacuum filters (sometimes pressurized to 3 bar gauge; Flotation tailings account for ~98% of the ore fed to the concentrator. They are stored in large Most concentrators are Copper flotation consists mainly of separating Cu-sulfide minerals from non-sulfide rock and Fe-sulfide minerals. Many Cu deposits also contain molybdenite. Others contain pentlandite [(Ni,Fe) Au is present in many Cu-sulfide ores, from just traces to ~1 g/t Au (1 × 10 The Au, Au alloy, and Au mineral grains in Cu–Au ores may be smaller than their companion Cu-sulfide mineral grains, so Au recovery may be increased by finer grinding. Optimum grind size is best determined by controlled in-plant testing. Fortunately, all of these gold mineral types float efficiently under the same conditions as Cu-sulfide minerals, using xanthate, dithiophosphate and thionocarbamate collectors  Copper sulfide ores must be concentrated before they can be economically transported and smelted. The universal technique for this concentration is froth flotation of finely ground ore. Froth flotation entails attaching fine Cu-sulfide mineral particles to bubbles and floating them out of a water–ore mixture. The flotation is made selective by using reagents, which make the Cu-sulfide minerals water-repellant (hydrophobic) while leaving the other minerals wetted (hydrophilic). Typical Cu sulfide recoveries to concentrate are 85–90%. Typical concentrate grades are 30% Cu (higher with chalcocite, bornite, and native copper mineralization). Column flotation cleaner cells are particularly effective at giving a high Cu grade in the concentrate. Modern concentrators are automatically controlled to give maximum Cu recovery, maximum % Cu in the concentrate, and maximum ore throughput rate at minimum cost. Expert control systems help to optimize the performance of flotation plants. On-stream particle size and on-stream X-ray fluorescence analyses are key components of this automatic control.