In order to understand the influence of crystallographic orientation on the mechanism of pyrite bioleaching, single crystals cut to expose plane orientations of (100), (111) and (110) were used for the study. Experiments to compare the extent of dissolution of the pyrite surfaces in the presence and absence of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans under similar solution conditions were undertaken by matching the conditions in abiotic solutions to those in bacterial leaching solutions using an electrolysis cell. The microbial corrosion patterns generated on the surfaces were further used to study the leaching process. Differences in the reaction rates of the pyrite surface planes in both abiotic and bacterial solutions have been observed. The results for the comparison between the bacterial and abiotic leaching of pyrite samples under similar conditions indicate higher dissolution rates in the presence of bacteria. In addition, the morphologies of corrosion patterns arising from microbial leaching were distinct from those of abiotic leached samples and were found to slightly differ from one crystal plane to another, while those in abiotic leaching generally reflected the symmetrical arrangement of the crystallographic planes in the lattice on which they formed. The results show that the surface properties of mineral sulphides control the evolution of corrosion patterns and the initial oxidation kinetics in acid bacterial leaching.An understanding of the reactivity of pyrite is important in view of its role in extractive metallurgy (e.g. processing of refractory gold ores), coal processing and geochemical processes like the production of acid mine waters. These processes involve reactions at pyrite surfaces and consequently, in the field of hydrometallurgy, there is great interest in appreciating the interaction of aqueous solutions with the mineral surfaces. A few studies involving the nature of surface reactions and the role of crystal structure in pyrite oxidation from the non-bio approach have been carried out on the most commonly occurring FeS The main objectives of the work described in this paper are to investigate the influence of crystallographic orientation on the bacterial leaching of pyrite crystals by comparing the extent of dissolution of pyrite surfaces in biotic and abiotic leaching experiments under similar solution conditions. In addition, the changes occurring in the solution chemistry are correlated to the surface degradation observed by undertaking an examination of the dissolution rates and the surface corrosion patterns associated with the dissolution process. Pyrite is the most common metal sulphide in the mineral processing industry. It has a face-centred cubic structure and is closely related to the rocksalt type. It is composed of two bonds; the Fe The strain of Single crystal cubes of Spanish natural pyrite (approximately 1 cm The aim of the experiments was to compare the extent of dissolution of the different crystallographic pyrite surfaces in bacterial and abiotic solutions under similar solution conditions, using a method previously adopted by The reaction for pyrite mineral dissolution is The leaching experiments were carried out in the modified 9 K basal medium at a pH of 1.8, adjusted with sulphuric acid. Initially, a ferrous iron solution giving a total Fe (II) concentration of 0.05 M was added to each solution to provide a source of energy for the bacteria in the bioleaching experiments and to gradually generate ferric ions by electrolytic oxidation in the abiotic leaching experiments. A cell suspension was added to the leaching solution to give an initial population of 1 A scanning electron microscope, JEOL JSM T220, was used to monitor bacterial adhesion and surface changes occurring on the samples during leaching. The samples were removed from solution, washed with acidified water and acetone, then dried, coated with a very thin layer of gold and observed under SEM. In the initial examination of the leached surfaces after 2 weeks of leaching, the surfaces were covered with precipitates and hence, bacteria and corrosion patterns could not be observed easily. Washing off the precipitates indicated that some of the bacteria cells were detached from the surfaces. Hence, to alleviate this problem, surfaces were then examined in the early leaching stages, e.g. 4–10 days, before heavy precipitate occurred. A detailed procedure for pit density analysis is given in a previous paper ( The total iron concentration in the bio-oxidation and abiotic leaching solutions was measured at a 2-day interval using a Perkin-Elmer 1100B atomic absorption spectrophotometer with an air/acetylene flame. The matching faces of the cut crystal surfaces, (110)A/(110)B, (100)A/(100)B and (111)A/(111)B were used for the experiments. The results for the leaching experiments, both in abiotic and biotic conditions, indicated that the surfaces of pyrite react at different rates ( While the leaching behaviour of the respective matching faces of the (100) and (110) planes were similar, those of the (111) surfaces differed ( The 111A surface generally showed a lower dissolution rate compared to the (100) and (110) planes during the early stages of leaching when the redox potential was low. The iron released from the (111)A plane only increased above that of the other planes after a sharp increase in solution potential around 8–10 days of leaching ( In general simulation of conditions experienced in bacterial leaching through control of the solution potential greatly increased the dissolution of pyrite under abiotic leaching conditions. It has been reported in literature that in acidic solutions, the overall oxidation reactions involve the formation of sulphur and/or a metal-deficient sulphide at low overpotentials and sulphate at high overpotentials ( One of the objectives of this study was to establish the role, if any, of cell–mineral interactions on the evolution of corrosion pits in bacterial leaching during the early stages of leaching in the absence of significant amounts of ferric ion. This was to be done by determining whether pits were established at locations on the mineral surface where there were attached bacteria. No significant bacterial colonisation was observed on the (111)A surfaces. On the other hand, while bacteria cells were observed on the (111)B, (110) and (100) surfaces, their distribution was random and they were not in close proximity to the corrosion pits as observed by previous researchers ( It was observed that the surface planes with high ratios of sulphur/iron atoms, e.g. the (111B), (100) and (110) generally generated elongated pits similar in shape to bacteria, but much larger than the bacteria cell dimensions ( One other interesting aspect was the observation of surface films ( A review of literature has indicated that bacteria seem to have a preferential attachment to specific sites, for example, sulphur enriched zones ( The importance of the surface structure on the leaching process of the pyrite crystal can also be understood by considering the leaching trend of the (111)B plane ( Examination of the (111)A surface did not reveal any corrosion pits during the first days of leaching. With the gradual production of ferric iron however, circular pits appeared ( Abiotic chemical leaching was characterised by leaching patterns distinct from those observed on bioleached samples. The corrosion pits were evenly distributed over the surface with no apparent preference for any one type of site. There were slight differences between the pitting morphologies observed from one crystal plane to the other, with the corrosion patterns having symmetries related to the crystallographic surface orientations. The (100) and (110) surfaces were characterised by rhombic pits, whilst the (111) surfaces were characterised by triangular pits. It is interesting to note that the morphology of these pits is closely similar to those observed by It was expected that with the progressive generation of ferric iron in biotic leaching samples leaching patterns similar to those observed in pure chemical leaching would be produced. Ferric iron formed by bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron would interact with the entire exposed surface, developing corrosion patterns similar in morphology and density as in abiotic leaching. However, this was not observed. It is possible therefore, that the surface films generated by the bacteria modify the constituent of the leaching solution as indicated by The results presented in this work ( The (111)A plane showed the least overall leaching enhancement by bacteria ( At the end of the leaching period the (111)B surface showed the highest overall bacterial leaching enhancement with the overall iron released in biotic samples being about 1.33 times that released in abiotic samples ( The results for all the surfaces subsequently show the significant influence of the solution potential and hence, ferric iron in the overall dissolution process. The work carried out has shown differences in the initial reaction rates of the pyrite surface planes in both abiotic and bacterial solutions. This has been explained as most likely being due to the influence of the differences in the surface atomic geometry and chemical surface states that dominate on pyrite surfaces. In addition, although previous work has shown the formation of organic surface films during bacteria–surface interaction, the work described here indicates that this film formation is specific to certain surface sites. The difference in corrosion patterns observed under similar biotic and abiotic leaching conditions suggests a difference in the leaching process for acid bacterial leaching as compared to ferric sulphate leaching possibly due to the surface films produced by bacteria. While residue forming precipitates have been noted by previous researchers ( The financial support by the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy through the Stanely Elmore Fellowship Fund, the Minerals Industry Educational Trust (MIET) and the Arthur Bensusan Memorial Fund (Zimbabwe) is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are due also to Professor F.D. Pooley of University College, Cardiff for donating the bacterial culture used in this work.