A recycling process consisting of swelling, ammonia leaching and hydrochloric acid leaching was developed to recover Sn, Bi, Cu, and resin from Pb-free Sn-Bi-Cu solder paste. The resin was separated from metal powder by swelling the solder paste in methyl ethyl ketone at 30°C, 200rpm and 5% pulp density. The addition of distilled water precipitated the resin from methyl ethyl ketone. The recovered resin was confirmed to be epoxy resin by FT-IR analysis. Ammonia leaching followed by hydrochloric acid leaching was performed to separate Cu, Sn, Bi sequentially from metal powder. Copper was solubilized easily with leaching efficiency reaching 100% within 15min under the following conditions: 5M NH3 solution, 1M (NH4)2CO3, 0.1M CuCO3, 50°C, and 1% pulp density. Tin and bismuth were recovered as leach residue in the ammonia leaching. Tin was selectively leached in 0.5M HCl solution with 10,000mg/L Sn4+ and 1% pulp density at 50°C and 400rpm, while Bi was not detected in the leach solution. The recycling process has successfully separated Sn, Cu, Bi and resin.The recovery of valuable metals from secondary resources such as Waste Pb-free solder can be recycled into solder bars by simple melting processes, which could pose serious environmental problems due to hazardous gas emissions from the combustion of organic flux in the Pb-free solder ( Research on Sn-Bi-Cu solder recycling is limited. To date, very few studies reported investigations on recycling processes for the new solder. Therefore, the present study is aimed at developing a new recycling process consisting of swelling, ammonia leaching followed by hydrochloric acid leaching with cupric and stannic ions as oxidants. The effects of the parameters, such as agitation speed, oxidant concentration, leaching media and pulp density, on the leaching behavior of Sn, Bi, and Cu were investigated and the results are discussed in this paper. The Pb-free solder paste containing 20% Bi, 17% Sn, 47% Cu and 16% resin was obtained from a solder company in Korea. The solder paste sample is still in the middle of development and this explains the higher Cu content compared to other commercialized Sn-Bi-Cu solders. All chemical properties of the paste sample other than Cu content are comparable to the commercial ones. All chemicals used in this study are of reagent-grade. When a resin is swollen by some organic solvents, the resin behaves like solution or suspension with the solvents. Swelling tests with methyl ethyl ketone (MEK) were conducted to separate the resin from metal components, using a 250 Leaching tests were performed in a 500 The resin separated from swelling test was analyzed with FT/IR 4100 (Jasco Analytical Instrument, Inc., Japan), and then digested using Start D microwave digestion system (Milestone Inc., Italy). The metal powder collected from swelling test and the leach residue obtained from ammonia leaching test were analyzed with SmartLab X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (Rigaku Co., Japan). The metal powder and the solder paste were examined with MIRA 3 FE-SEM (Field emission scanning electron microscope) (TESCAN Inc., Czech Republic). The leaching residue was digested with HNO The Sn-Bi-Cu solder paste contains resin, so swelling test with MEK was conducted to remove the resin components. MEK was found to be an effective solvent to dissolve resin ( A leaching process was designed to separate Sn, Bi, Cu, respectively, from metal powder, using ammonia leaching with cupric ion (Cu This reaction could be achieved in the pH range of 9–11 (  Sn and Bi were not detected in leach solution in all ammonia leaching tests. The XRD results of as-received solder paste and ammonia leach residue are shown in  The leaching behaviors of Sn and Bi were investigated in 0.5 The ammonia leach residue contains 46% Sn and 54% Bi. Given this concentration, more than 4600 The effect of pulp density on the leaching efficiency of Sn was investigated in 0.5 Based on the results discussed above, a recycling process for the waste Pb-free solder paste of Sn-Bi-Cu series is proposed. The process, as shown in A hydrometallurgical route was investigated to separate resin, Cu, Sn and Bi, respectively, from Sn-Bi-Cu solder paste. The swelling test with MEK, ammonia leaching with Cu The removal of resin enhanced the leaching efficiency of metals and the resin was determined to be epoxy resin by FT-IR analysis. The copper component can be selectively leached from metal powders in ammonia solution with cupric ion. It can be separated from Bi in the ammonia leaching residue by hydrochloric acid leaching with stannic ions. Consequently, these hydrometallurgical processes could separate resin, Cu, Sn, and Bi from Pb-free solder paste and could eliminate the hazardous gas emission associated with conventional recycling processes, such as melting. This study was supported by the R&D Center for Valuable Recycling (Global-Top R&BD Program) of the