In this study, the flotation behavior and mechanism of an azobenzene-based surfactant on quartz were studied by micro-flotation tests, zeta potential measurements and adsorption analysis. The stability of foams produced by the surfactant can be controlled by ultraviolet (UV) light irradiation. Photocontrolled foams improve the floatability of quartz due to the significant changes in the foam properties. UV light irradiation decreases the zeta potential values of quartz and the adsorption of the surfactants on quartz. The azobenzene-based surfactant predominantly adsorbed to quartz compared to apatite.Foam stabilization is of great importance in froth flotation. In a flotation process, stable foams are initially produced but foams should be easily reduced in the final step Phosphate rock is neither substitutable nor recyclable. It is mainly used as the key raw material to produce phosphate fertilizers. Quartz is the main gangue mineral in phosphate rock. Cationic surfactants are currently used to separate quartz from phosphate ores Pure minerals (quartz and apatite) were provided by SKLE. These minerals were over 90% in purity based on mineralogical analysis and X-ray diffraction data. The surfactant, 4-butyl-(4′-(3-trimethylammoniumpropyloxy)-phenyl) azobenzene, was used as a collector. The azobenzene-based surfactant was synthesized according to the procedure described in reference  UV light irradiation was done by a Prizmatix device equipped with photodiodes (YL-512, Landun Photoelectricity, Guangdong, 365 A cylindrical glass container (25 The flotation test was performed in a XFG flotation machine with a volume of 40 The Zeta potential measurements were performed with a Zetapotential analyzer (Brookhaven Zeta Plus). A 10 A mineral sample (1   Results from the micro-flotation experiments are shown in Without UV light irradiation, quartz attained a high recovery (90%) and apatite yielded a low recovery (29%). So the surfactant was very useful for quartz flotation. In the presence of UV light irradiation, the recovery of quartz appeared to be significantly increased by 4%; the recovery of apatite was slightly increased by about 1%. The UV light irradiation obviously promoted the flotation of quartz. The effect of pH on quartz and apatite flotation is showed in  In the presence of the surfactant, the isoelectric point of apatite was found at pH6.7. Then it decreased to pH 5.7 after UV light irradiation. The isoelectric point of quartz in the surfactant solution was shown at pH11.4. But it was shifted to pH 10.3 after UV light irradiation. Apparently, UV light irradiation decreased the isoelectric point values of apatite and quartz. Addition of the surfactant led to a dramatic increase in the zeta potential values of quartz. Quartz gave pronounced positive values over a broad pH range. There was a small decrease in the zeta potential values of quartz after exposure to UV light. It indicated that some surfactants were desorbed from quartz and entered the solution. The adsorbed amount of the surfactants on the quartz surface was decreased. The surfactant adsorption to quartz increased steadily with an increase in the surfactant concentration as shown in The flotation of phosphate ores is a complicated physicochemical process, which is connected with several equilibriums emerging simultaneously. Surfactants adsorb to bubble and particles and make particles more hydrophobic. As for the azobenzene-based surfactant, UV light irradiation makes the equilibriums more complicated. There was a good agreement between the flotation and the Zeta potential of the minerals. Quartz yielded much higher flotation recovery than apatite. Correspondingly, quartz exhibited significantly higher zeta potential values than apatite. The azobenzene-based surfactant showed a strong preference for quartz over apatite and predominantly adsorbed to quartz. It is noteworthy that UV light irradiation effectively improved the flotation recovery of quartz. The azobenzene-based surfactant exhibited a conversion between cis and trans isomers under exposure to UV light It should be pointed out that there was an apparent contradiction between flotation performance and surfactant adsorption to quartz. After UV light irradiation, the azobenzene-based surfactant exhibited higher flotation recovery of quartz, whereas the amount of surfactant adsorbed to quartz was decreased. According to Karlkvist The flotation of mineral particles is dependent on the bubble-particle collision In this study, photofoams and flotation mechanism of an azobenzene-based surfactant on quartz were investigated. We found that UV light irradiation decreased the stability of the foams produced by the surfactant. Micro-flotation tests indicated that the floatability of quartz was improved by UV light irradiation. UV light irradiation decreased the zeta potential values of quartz and some surfactants were desorbed from quartz. This paper shows the potential of photofoams for specific mineral flotation processes.