Recycling of lithium-ion batteries enables the recovery of scarce raw materials with lower economic, ecological, and social impacts compared to the primary production. However, the full potential of the recycling can only be reached through cooperation between forward and reverse supply chain. Due to the autonomy of the different companies, the decision-making process in such cooperation is decentralized. In practice, this leads to inefficiencies. Therefore, this contribution aims develop models for the decentralized planning of production and recycling, which are suitable for the application of lithium-ion batteries, and use them to analyze inefficiencies based on a case study.The electrification of vehicles leads to increasing demand and hence, increasing return of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). These batteries contain a large variety of scarce raw materials like lithium, cobalt, nickel, and graphite ( To ensure a sustainable treatment of spent batteries, different legal regulations have been enforced over the last decades. For example, the European Union passed the Directive 2006/66/EC, which regulates the responsibilities and requirements for the return and treatment process. It obliges producers of batteries to take back spent batteries and secure an adequate treatment. In particular, the treatment of LIB for electric vehicles (EV) is restricted by minimal recycling efficiency and disposal prohibition. In the current industry's practice, the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) of an EV is responsible for ensuring the legal requirements, but it usually transfers the take-back and treatment to companies of the reverse supply chain. Therefore, production and recycling are widely uncoupled. Due to rising material prices and potential supply shortages, OEMs are currently intensifying their efforts regarding the end-of-life (EOL) of LIB. This results in increasing interdependencies between the production of EVs and the recycling of LIBs. Besides, companies of the forward and reverse supply chain face further challenges due to uncertainties regarding the return of spent LIBs. These uncertainties exist regarding the amount, type, and quality of the spent LIBs. The increasing interdependencies between forward and reverse supply chain and the new challenges necessitate a coordinated approach over all companies. Especially, the decision on executed EOL-options is affected because the decision is made by the reverse supply chain, but the demand arises from the forward supply chain. This decision is part of the short-term production and recycling planning. However, current practice in short-term planning is local optimization without coordination between the companies. Such approaches usually lead to inefficiencies in the supply chain ( Therefore, this contribution aims to present a model for decentralized production and recycling planning and analyze the effect of decentralized decision-making under consideration of the challenges in the short-term planning based on this model. The remainder of this paper is structured, as follows: in chapter 2, approaches for the production and recycling planning are analyzed. In chapter 3, we formulate a new approach for decentralized production and recycling planning. In chapter 4, economic challenges and the impact on ecologic aspects of the EOL-options for LIBs are analyzed in a given case study. The paper closes with a conclusion and an outlook in chapter 5. Production planning is a key problem for research since the mid-20th century. It aims to balance the available capacity with the demand under consideration of cost minimization or contribution margin maximization ( Due to the increasing importance of the EOL, production planning approaches were adopted in the form of recycling planning. According to production planning, recycling planning aims to balance the available capacity with demand. Nevertheless, the planning problems differ due to different considered activities and challenges. However, interdependencies between recycling planning and production planning are neglected. Therefore, integrated production and recycling planning aims to consider both planning problems simultaneously. Hence, it must be decided whether new parts or (remanufactured) spent parts are used. In the following, we will give an overview of optimization models with a focus on integrated production and recycling planning. A variety of approaches investigates manufacturing-remanufacturing systems ( We consider a closed-loop supply chain consisting of a producer and a recycler of LIBs (see The producer can perform two activities. First, they are able to produce objects. Second, they can substitute objects to lower quality in order to meet low-quality demand with high-quality objects. The different available activities are assigned to at least one segment. Hence, not every activity can be performed in every segment. Furthermore, they are capable of storing objects in the segments. These activities are bounded by technical and inventory capacity. Under consideration of available activities and capacities, the producer decides on production amounts, substitution amounts, transportation between segments, procurement from primary supplier, and sales. The least is bounded by demand. After the use of the LIB, the recycler takes back the spent batteries. Using the returned LIBs, they are capable of performing disassembly, recycling, remanufacturing, and substitution activities. According to the production, each activity is assigned to at least one segment. Furthermore, they are capable of storing objects in the segments. Besides technical and inventory capacity, the recycling system is bounded by recycling efficiency and disposal prohibition. Under consideration of the boundaries, the recycler decides on disassembly amounts, recycling amounts, remanufacturing amounts, substitution amounts, transportation between segments, procurement, sales of recycling residues, and disposal amounts. In addition to the individual decisions, producer and recycler together need to decide on the traded objects between both companies (procurement from secondary supplier/ producer). To ensure the recycling efficiency, we consider four assumptions. First, we subdivide the qualities into two quality classes: return quality In order to enable decentralized planning, we formulate two individual deterministic linear programming models for the producer and the recycler. Therefore, we develop different objective functions, starting with production planning. The objective function of the production ( In the following, the objective function for the recycling is formulated. According to the production, the objective function of the recycling ( The model for production planning contains 12 constraints, and the model for the recycling planning model contains 13 constraints. The constraints can be divided into eight categories, which we formulate verbally. First, one constraint ensures stock balance considering previous stock, procured objects, sold objects, and the transformation of objects by the activities. In the case of recycling, disposal and return are added to the constraint. Second, two constraints ensure only new components and raw materials can be procured from the primary supplier. Another constraint ensures each procured object is assigned to one segment. Third, two constraints ensure the sales to be equal or smaller than demand and each sold object is allocated from exactly one segment into sales. Fourth, two constraints ensure activities to be consistent with the technical and inventory capacity. Each segment has a technical capacity, which represents the bottleneck resource of the segment, e.g., workers in the disassembly. Each activity loads on the capacity and the total amount of load on the capacity may not exceed the capacity. In the case of production planning, only production activities load on the recycling. In the case of recycling planning, disassembly, recycling, and remanufacturing load on the capacity. The inventory capacity is segment-specific and regenerates each period. Each object stored in the segment individually loads on the inventory capacity depending on its weight. The total load may not exceed inventory capacity. Fifth, one constraint ensures all decision variables to be non-negative. Sixth, two constraints are added to the production planning model. One to ensure products to be procured from the secondary supplier in sales qualities unequal new and one to ensure that the maximal quantity, which the secondary supplier is capable to provide, is not exceeded. Another constraint ensures each procured object is assigned to exactly one segment. Seventh, two constraints are added to the recycling planning model to ensure each return is either assigned to disposal or a segment and the total amount of disposed objects equals the direct disposed and from a segment disposed objects. Eighth, two constraints are added to the recycling planning model to ensure recycling plans to follow the legal requirements of recycling efficiency and disposal prohibition. For the recycling efficiency, a given share of the input must be recovered by recycling. Because one recycler usually cannot recycle all objects, sold recycling residues also contribute to the recycling efficiency by a given factor. In the following, we present a case study on the production and recycling of LIB. The case study is based on different findings in the literature. The aim is to analyze problems caused by the decentralized planning of production and recycling of LIBs for EV. Therefore, two LIBs, differing in size (large and small), are considered containing the same nickel-manganese-cobalt (NMC) battery packs with a distribution of 1-1-1. Besides the battery packs, the system periphery, e.g., housing and battery-management-system (BMS), differ between the batteries. The system composition follows the generic NMC-LIB of In the following, we give an overview of the considered activities of the producer as well as the recycler. The production of the batteries is divided into three stages. First, battery cells are produced with raw material ( After the production, the LIBs are sold, and it is assumed that they return into the system after an average lifetime of eight years. Then different EOL-options can be used. First, LIBs can be disassembled in order to recover components or perpetrate them for recycling. According to the return quality, the share of “remanufactured”, “refurbished”, and “recyclable” battery packs, which can be recovered, differs. Furthermore, recycling residues are recovered, like aluminum scrape and electronic waste. For recycling, the LithoRec process is considered ( Besides recycling, LIBs of the quality “refurbished” can be remanufactured and further used, e.g., as a spare part. Therefore, battery packs are replaced, which are not of the quality “remanufactured”, with “new” or “remanufactured” battery packs. The amount of battery packs, which need to be replaced, follows the share applied to the disassembly. In order to calculate the contribution margins, cost structures and sales revenues need to be defined. The material costs for cobalt, nickel, aluminum, and copper correspond to the price at the London Metal Exchange on 1st August 2019 ( In the following, decentralized and a centralized decision-making are considered. The decentralized decision-making represents the current practice in the industry. In contrast, the centralized decision-making illustrates the supply chain-wide optimal decision by simultaneously planning production and recycling and serves as a benchmark. The models are implemented in AIMMS and solved with GUROBI 8.1 using a 4.00 GHz CPU and 16 GB RAM. In addition to decentralized decision-making, we considered a model with centralized decision-making as a benchmark. The model of the producer contains 37,729 variables and 40,573 constraints, the model of the recycler contains 62,761 variables and 64,909 constraints, and the model with centralized decision-making containts 106,729 variables and 104,089 constraints. Each model is solved in less than one second. As shown in The non-optimal decisions influence the assigned EOL-option. In the centralized decision-making, high-quality returns are reused in order to achieve the maximal contribution margin. However, the high prices for remanufactured and refurbished LIBs prevent the producer from buying those products. Instead, it decides to buy recycled materials and use them to produce new LIBs. Since reuse and remanufacturing are considered to be ecologic profitable EOL-solutions, it is shown that decentralized decision-making does have not only negative effects on the economic but also ecologic impacts of the EOL of LIBs. In this contribution, a new formulation for the decentralized production and recycling planning under consideration of recycling efficiency is presented. The new formulation enables decision-makers to create feasible production and recycling plans according to the current law in Europe. Therefore, the model extends current approaches for the application of LIBs. In the case study, it is shown that inefficiencies make up to 5% of the supply chain-wide achievable contribution margin. Hence, uncoordinated decentralized decision-making has a significant economic impact on the supply chain. The inefficiencies result from two main reasons. First, each company optimizes locally. Second, information asymmetries prevent companies from integrating global interdependences into planning. In the future, further research needs consist of two aspects. First, uncertainties are a major problem in the planning of LIB. Therefore, the formulated models should be extended regarding return uncertainties. This will likely lead to increasing inefficiencies. Second, the inefficiencies necessitate a closed-loop supply chain management in order to reduce negative economic and ecologic effects caused by decentralized decision-making. Especially coordination mechanism needs to be developed, which enables the companies to achieve an economically efficient decentralized planning.  This work is part of the research project Recycling 4.0 (EFRE | ZW 6-85018080), which is funded by the European Regional Development Fund and the development bank for the German federal state of Lower Saxony (NBank). The authors would like to thank for the support.