The effect of co-feeding nitrogen in Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) in a fixed bed reactor over a Co/TiO2 catalyst was investigated. The partial pressure of reactants (CO and H2) in the feed to the reactor was kept constant, while the partial pressure of N2 was switched between a low and high value. The low value corresponded to a syngas feed while the high value corresponded to a feed of syngas enriched with N2. A comparison of the results obtained from more than four switches between syngas and syngas enriched with N2 are reported. The results indicate that there was almost no effect on the overall reaction rate, but that there was a significant, positive effect on the product selectivity. A lower selectivity to the undesired light hydrocarbons (especially methane) was observed when co-feeding N2. Such results cannot be explained by classic kinetics alone as the partial pressures of CO and H2 were held constant during the experiment. The laboratory data indicates that the selectivity to the (C5–C19) fraction is particularly enhanced by co-feeding N2 in FTS.Fischer–Tropsch synthesis (FTS) is a well-known chemical reaction in which synthesis gas is converted to liquid fuels over a metal catalyst. Several transition metals including cobalt, iron, nickel and ruthenium can be used in FT. However, only cobalt and iron are used in commercial FT processes for various economical and technical reasons Several FT kinetic models reported in the literature have been used to predict the reaction activity, and most of them show that the FT reaction rate depends strongly on the reactant partial pressure (particularly hydrogen) which indicates that constant FT reaction rates should be obtained when using the same catalyst, the same particle size, same reactor, the same temperature and the same constant reactant partial pressures. However, some experimental results showed that when the feed flow rate was increased, with fairly similar partial pressures of the reactants in the feed to the reactor, there was a positive effect on the FT activity and product selectivity Syngas composition can strongly influence FTS performance and product selectivity The addition of components to the feed to the FT reactor may have advantages or drawbacks, depending on the view of the researcher. However, in many cases, scientists using the same co-feeding agent, often report contradictory findings. An important question that arises from this seeming complexity is whether or not kinetics and diffusion alone is sufficient to explain FTS. Based on previous reports Therefore in this work, the effect of feeding N A supported cobalt catalyst (10% cobalt/90% TiO The FTS setup comprises one stainless steel reactor manufactured by Autoclave Engineers, mounted vertically. The dimensions of the reactor are: an internal diameter (ID) of 8 One gram of Co/TiO The reaction was initially run for 24 We used a FTS process configuration which is similar to the open gas loop design. The flow was once through and thus it was simple to operate and there was no build-up of inert gas (N The researchers took precautions to ensure that the FTS was operated isothermally within the catalyst bed. These precautions included (a) a small inner diameter reactor was used (8 In order to simplify the interpretation of the results, the FT reaction was run at low conversion thereby ensuring that the partial pressures did not change significantly over the catalyst bed. The experimental setup used in this paper was configured in such a way that the outlet flow rate could be calculated from the inlet volumetric flow rate. To repeat what has already been mentioned, N      The conversion (CO The rate of CO conversion can be calculated as below:      The molar flowrates can be calculated as follows: By substituting and simplifying, it can be shown that the rate of CO consumption can be calculated by: Eq. The rate of formation of a gas product    The product selectivity was calculated on a moles of carbon basis, as follows: The product selectivity to carbon 5+ ( The conversion of the reactants as a function of TOS was determined and the results are presented in The summary of the conditions for the FT experiments shown in The effect of N The results for the selectivity to total light hydrocarbons (olefins plus paraffins) from C The effect of co-feeding N In order to compare the data, we have plotted the averaged selectivity data for two FT runs (switch 1 as shown in The full FT product distribution for the two sets of experiments (switch 2 under the reaction condition shown in However the selectivity to the undesired light hydrocarbons (C The O/P ratio for the light hydrocarbons was plotted against TOS in In conclusion, it is clear that while the addition of the extra N In comparison with previous results, Snel In particular, we have designed our experiments in such a way that we have tried to keep the partial pressures of the reactants the same, whether the extra N We have only been able to come up with one possible explanation when changes depend on total pressure but not on partial pressures. This suggests that the phenomenon that is involved here is boiling. As the formation of bubbles (boiling) depends on a mechanical property, namely the vapour pressure inside the bubble must be marginally greater than the total pressure, this could perhaps explain the results presented in this paper. Building a simple model may show the effect of bubbling. We know that if the system is ideal we can write for each component  VLE: in this case where And Boiling: in this case Now the two scenarios can be compared (see However, for boiling the RHS’s are different in the two cases. In order for this to be true as the values of The effect of feeding extra N Comparing the results between (S) and (S At present, the existing kinetics/ diffusion models and simple VLE cannot be used to explain this experimental phenomenon, which suggests that the complexity of FT system is not only due to the reaction mechanism and diffusion limitations, but might be due to other factors as well. A model based on boiling (bubbling) is suggested as a possible way in which the results could be explained. These results suggest that there are positive benefits to co-feeding N The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the