The interaction of glucose with pyrite has been investigated by a series of surface analyses, such as amounts adsorbed, TG, FTIR and XRD measurements. The adsorption experiment reveals that glucose would rapidly adsorb on the pyrite surface within 60min. However, physical adhesion characterized as multi-molecular layer adsorption may occur based on adsorption isotherm type. All results obtained by TG and FTIR suggest that no adsorption took place after several times of washing. XRD results indicate that crystal structure of pyrite was not obviously destructed after glucose was added. The interplane distances of (111), (400) after interaction between glucose and pyrite were widened, which showed the similar manner with that of before interaction. All these convincing data imply that physical adsorption predominantly governs the interaction of glucose on pyrite.Attachment to mineral surface is a prerequisite for direct bacterial oxidation in the bioleaching operations ( The complex EPS composition and time-consuming procedure for extraction and separation lead to the difficulty in researching how the whole EPS responds to mineral. It may be quite useful for us to simplify and simulate their interaction using glucose instead of extracellular polysaccharides. Polysaccharides such as dextrin and amylose have been used as selective depressants in sulfide mineral flotation ( In this paper, adhesion of glucose on metals sulfide was characterized by means of amounts adsorbed, TG, FTIR and XRD methods. Taking glucose as a simplified unit, our aim is to examine its interaction manner between glucose and sulfide mineral. Pyrite used in the experiment is a well-crystallized mineral from a domestic geological museum. Its chemical composition analysis by scanning electron probe was reported elsewhere ( Mineral powder and glucose (without it in control experiment) were proportionately mixed and the final dispersion was made up to the required volume of 40 After a series of procedures like blending, agitation and rinsing, the mixture was filtered, dried by silica gel for 24 The raw samples were measured by Rigaku diffractometer in the range of 2 DSC-TGA measurement was performed by using a Simultaneous DSC-TGA (SDT) Q600 thermal analyzer under air atmosphere with flowing rate of 100 The experiment was performed with different mineral to glucose mass ratios ( Much information about interaction between adsorbent and adsorbate can be acquired from the adsorption isotherm. To provide more evidence to verify its adsorption patterns, an FTIR experiment was carried out. Note that experimental conditions were identical to the adsorption operations. Pyrite has a cubic structure with lattice constant The TG curves with different heating rates are shown in A series of convincing experimental results tend to prove that adsorption of glucose on pyrite is a simply physical behavior. It seems incompatible with the previous understanding of mechanism of dextrin adsorption on mineral ( In this case, it is of interest to reexamine the issue of chemical interaction versus physical adsorption in light of observations summarized herein. During the previous research, the rinsing of sample before further surface analyses, such as FTIR, zeta potential measurement, was not mentioned or was ignored by authors ( It can apparently be observed that amounts of glucose adsorb on pyrite surface with increasing time, however, its interaction was not confirmed as chemical action described by other authors majoring in interaction between dextrin and pyrite. All the results obtained through TG,FTIR and XRD analyses showed that there is no glucose left on the pyrite surface after three times of washing. It is safe to draw a conclusion that only physical adsorption dominates whole interaction between glucose and mineral. The authors gratefully acknowledged the financial support from the