Stress in the Cat-CVD μc-Si:H films is of concern for the performance of the flexible solar cells and MEMS devices. We report the results of our initial studies on stress determination of the HWCVD deposited μc-Si:H films and its variation with thermal treatment. From the analysis of the stress values of the intrinsic μc-Si:H films it is seen (at least in the preliminary results obtained) that films deposited around 250 °C show a lower stress which could be due to the better network and optimum hydrogen content in the films. Secondly the doped films show an order of magnitude larger internal stress compared to the intrinsic films while the grain size is comparable. However upon annealing the stress minimizes and we get films with very low stress.Low pressure chemical vapor deposited (LPCVD) polycrystalline silicon thin films have wide applicability in electronic, opto-electronic and, now, in surface micromachined (MEMS) devices We are in a process to develop flexible solar cells and MEMS devices based on μc-Si:H. In the MEMS cantilever based devices these films will be used as both the structural layer as well as the piezoresistive sensing element. Thus the structural layer would largely be of intrinsic in nature while the piezo would be a p-type film. The choice of the p-type films is driven by the fact that the piezoresistive coefficient given as Δ μc-Si:H films were deposited on p-type Si wafer (100) with resistivity of 8–12 Ω cm having a thermally grown oxide layer of thickness approximately 15 nm and also on plain Si substrates (with native oxide). The process conditions employed during the deposition were Filament temperature Gas pressure SiH Substrate temperature Filament geometry—a multiple W shape filament with an area of 1 cm by 2 cm. Stress measurements were carried out on different sets of samples. In one set the intrinsic μc-Si:H films with a thickness around 4000 Å were deposited at different substrate temperatures from 150 to 350 °C. The second set of samples contained films of different thicknesses deposited at a substrate temperature of 250 °C under similar other process conditions and in the third set a doped film was annealed at 400 °C for different times. X-ray measurements were done with the help of a Siemens D-500 X-ray Diffractometer and a Philips ExPert machine. From the X-ray data the strain The From the sin Residual stresses in thin films are of the following types: (i) Epitactic stresses which arise due to misfit of inter atomic distances. (ii) Thermal stresses arising from difference in coefficient of thermal expansion and (iii) intrinsic stresses due to physical, chemical and structural transformation of film, film densification, vacancy, interstitial or doping particle diffusion, chemical reactions and phase transformations like oxidation. Such stresses could affect the thin film device in various ways. The entire substrate can bend or even roll if it is too thin as shown in the In In However from both the methods we see that the stress is tensile in nature and increases with film thickness. Interestingly the grain size also increases indicating grain growth. Such an increase in the residual stress with thickness or the grain size has significant implications in a tandem cell with thick μc-Si:H intrinsic layer. Therefore it would be an important effort to minimize this stress for thick films. In From the initial studies on the determination of the residual stress in HWCVD deposited μc-Si:H films we see that the substrate temperature significantly affects the growth process which results in a variation of both grain size and the residual stress in the films. Though the minimum in both the grain size and the residual stress observed around 250 °C is not very easily explainable we think that understanding the role of hydrogen is key to the optimization of the these two parameters of the μc-Si:H films which are important from the point of technological applications. We believe in the stress data obtained by sin This method does not force us to use standard The stress values calculated by sin Further, annealing of the doped films yields almost stress-free material which is another useful result from the sensor application point of view since this material has very good piezoresistive properties which allow it to be integrated with the MEMS devices. The observation that the stress increases with increasing thickness is very important from the application of μc-Si:H films for tandem cells.