In the coming decades, copper scarcity is likely to result in deteriorating ore quality, which in turn will lead to a higher GER (gross energy requirement) for copper production. In this study, this increasing GER and the effect it has on the EROI (energy return on investment) of wind turbine technologies have been analysed. The GER of copper in a 2050 100% renewable energy system will be a factor 2–7 larger than it is today, depending on technological progress, the recycling rate and the future electricity demand. Because of an increasing in-use stock of copper, recycling will play a relatively small role even when the recycling rate is high. The future EROI of wind turbines is approximately 15% less than is currently often taken into account, mainly due to network losses.
                  The GER of increasingly scarce materials can potentially be used as a more meaningful indicator for abiotic depletion in LCA studies than the current mineral reserve based practice.In the last decades, there has been an exponential growth in the demand for a large number of minerals as a result of the strong growth in emerging economies and an increasing complexity of products. In future, this trend will be increasingly reinforced by the global renewable energy transition that is at hand. Given that virtually all renewable energy is found in a far more diffuse form than fossil fuels, it requires a multitude of installations to extract it. This, in turn, means an increasing material intensity for the worldwide renewable energy supply system compared to the current system One effect of this growing demand in metals is a depletion of resources of higher quality and with better accessibility, which in turn may lead to increasing energy requirement for mineral production. For energy supply technologies in particular this poses a problem. The resources needed to build these technologies are extracted with the goal of ultimately producing energy. Therefore, if the extraction of materials requires too much energy the overall return on energy gets too low. This return on energy is described with the term “EROI” or ‘energy return on investment’. This concept can be defined as the energy yield divided by the energy that was originally needed to obtain it With this study, an attempt was made to analyse the influence of copper scarcity on various renewable energy scenarios. The central claim in various assessments of future energy scenarios is the statement that a worldwide energy supply based on 100% renewables is technically possible in a future year This study is focused on the case of copper because it is a well-studied bulk material as well as considered a scarce mineral with only 60 years of expected availability at current production levels Exploring this study's topic requires an interdisciplinary approach, combining insights from geology, economy and engineering. The methodology can roughly be divided into two phases: 1) Construction of a cumulative primary copper production/energy supply curve and 2) Modelling the effect of future renewable energy scenarios on the supply of primary and secondary copper and on the resulting changing energy requirement per kilogram copper. Especially the methodology of the first part will be addressed in detail. The methodology of the second part will be explained in less detail, but is described extensively in the The energy supply curve resulting from this analysis can illustrate how the gross energy requirement (GER) First, the grade distribution that can be found in the copper deposits worldwide has been determined. A distinction was made between the undiscovered (unanalysed) deposits and the known deposits that have been analysed and partially depleted. This distribution was then linked to the expected copper availability in all the deposits worldwide. Here, the distribution functions and the total amounts of copper were subdivided into ten equal parts for both the “undiscovered” and the “partially exhausted” deposit category. These twenty amounts of copper were calculated for 40 different depths (segments of 100 m, up to 4000 m), resulting in a matrix that represents 800 amounts of copper with different grades and depths. Next, the GER for each amount of copper was determined, taking into account the energy requirement associated with the different depths and grades. The “ore grade – copper GER relationship” was derived by combining six studies that explored this topic (see section on the ore grade–energy relation), resulting in a lower, average and upper GER value for each grade. The “deposit depth – copper GER relationship” was derived from a benchmark study of Canadian open pit mines The supply curve resulting from the procedure described above includes all the copper that is theoretically available in all the discovered and undiscovered deposits up to 4 km depth worldwide. Yet, it is very likely there are many more constraints in retrieving this copper from the ground. For instance, it could be very difficult to extract copper from areas such as nature reserves, agricultural land, mountain ranges or cities. Therefore, the same procedure was repeated for two situations where only a share of the deposits can be reached: A scenario where only the known deposits are available and a scenario where only half of the assumed undiscovered deposits can be reached. The latter is rather arbitrary, but nonetheless, it can give an idea of the implication of the availability of large amounts of undiscovered copper. In order to express the worldwide distribution of copper in terms of grade, a so called cumulative distribution function was used, which is basically a (graphical) representation of the probabilities of finding ore at different grades within a certain deposit type. For this purpose, a methodology developed by Gerst (2008) From using these databases it could be derived that an estimated 4.89 Gtons of copper is available in the identified deposits worldwide of which 55% is found in porphyry, 35% in sediment hosted, 3% in VMS deposits and 7% in other deposits. These estimates are based on several assumptions. First of all, it was assumed that the deposits that have not been analysed in terms of ore grade and tonnage hold the same amount of copper and have the same ore grade as the average analysed deposit of that type. Secondly, it was assumed that the ratio of the different types of known deposits represents the actual ratio found in discovered as well as in undiscovered deposits worldwide. Although all three deposit types are an economical source of copper, it is not inconceivable that we discovered a disproportionally small or large share of one of them. Another assumption was that the 7% copper that is produced from deposits other than of the three main type's shows the same grade-tonnage distribution. The last assumption was that the ore grades that have been found in the currently known deposits represent those in the total physical stock and that additional discoveries of deposits do not considerably affect the form of the curve. In Gerst (2008) The estimated grade distribution of the total worldwide copper stock (represented in For the estimation of the ultimate resources of copper in reachable ores worldwide, use was made of the global porphyry copper assessment of Kesler and Wilkinson (2008) Assuming that most copper is identified at the surface and hardly any copper is identified at 5 km depth As in Kesler and Wilkinson (2008)  Current mining has mainly affected this upper layer of the crust, in particular the first 500 m. From Long (2011) In this study the “ore grade – GER relationship” and “deposit depth – GER relationship” were analysed to ultimately determine how much energy will be required in future scenarios if these factors deteriorate. In order to understand how geological circumstances might influence the energy requirement, some aspects of the energy use in copper production have to be explained. The main distinction that can be made is between It is important to realise that most energy is needed in the first phases of production: mining and beneficiation. Beneficiation or mineral processing is the operation of removing the gangue (excess) minerals from the ore to produce a concentrate (higher grade product, mainly consisting of the metal hosting minerals) and tailings (low metal grade waste stream). The energy requirement in only these first phases depends on mining depth and ore grade. Deeper deposits and especially lower ore grades increase the energy requirement due to the inevitable processing of more material Various sources have been used to determine the relationship between copper ore grade and the overall energy requirement for mining, beneficiation, extraction and refining: Classen and Althaus (2007) Only Classen and Althaus It is important to make a distinction between the different factors that add to the overall GER of copper; 1) primary energy in fuels directly used during copper production, 2) primary energy needed to produce the electricity used during copper production 3) primary energy requirement for the materials and infrastructure needed in the different processing steps. In order to compare the different studies, several adjustments had to be made, mainly regarding the inclusion of the energy use of relevant upstream processes that were not considered or depicted in some of the studies. Where needed, the share of electricity was determined or estimated in order to convert the energy use to primary energy values. An estimated 0.36 MJ electricity per MJ direct fuel use (pyrometallurgical route Compared to the effect of ore grade on the energy requirement, it is much less straightforward to identify the influence of increasing depths. In fact, it is extremely rare to model something other than only grade in studies such as these, since most of the other factors that can increase the energy use in mineral processing (e.g. smaller metal seams and more remote deposits) depend on a whole complex set of interacting geological variables. Still, it is widely understood that mining depth can play a large role in the overall energy requirement, as this will either mean removing more overburden in open pit mining or move to underground mining (starting from depths of roughly below 1000 m), which has its own set of technical and environmental complications Here, a benchmark study of 9 Canadian open pit mines was used to estimate the amount of energy needed for removing overburden It is important to relate this energy increase to a baseline, since the determination of current energy requirement of copper mining (as found in the six energy-grade studies) is already based on the fact that current mines have a certain depth. The weighted average of mining depths in present day copper mines was found to be 497 m The next methodological phase involved applying the copper supply curve from the first phase to possible future renewable energy scenarios. The future EROI of wind turbines (including the transmission system) is used to exemplify the effect of the copper inputs in the different scenarios. Next to the energy output of the turbines, this value is defined by three energy “losses” (depicted by the three arrows entering the “future EROI” box): 1) The life cycle of the turbines (mainly the building phase) 2) The energy requirement for the construction and maintenance of the electricity transmission network (due to a higher intermittency of the electricity produced – e.g. from PV, wind and concentrated solar power (CSP) a relatively larger electricity grid per unit of transported electricity has to be built in order to match supply and demand over higher distances and in greater detail; the more intermittent sources are used, the larger the grid has to be) 3) The energy losses in the form of heat that occur when transporting the electricity. These losses increase when the transportation distance increases due to a higher share of intermittent energy sources. In turn, the energy requirement in the construction phase of the turbines and the transmission grid are influenced by the aggregated GER of copper. This value depends on the total copper requirement, the ratio of primary and secondary copper production and the GER of these two processes. The calculated total copper requirement in a given scenario results from the combined effect of “normal” copper use and additional copper use to support a new renewable energy system. For the recycling rate, a normal (=current) and increased recycling scenario have been used to illustrate the effect recycling can have on the GER of copper and on the EROI value of wind energy (see below). The ratio of primary and secondary copper in the 2050 baseline scenario is set equal to the situation in 2010, and is based on the current ratio used in Europe as found in the Ecoinvent database To understand the possible effects that copper scarcity can have on a “renewable future” and vice versa, three 2050 100% renewable energy scenarios are chosen as a basis for further calculations; a low, medium and high energy demand scenario, according to the expected future global energy demand ( For each scenario the share of electricity in the energy mix is given as this determines how much copper will eventually be needed in these scenarios for the construction of the energy installations and the supporting electricity grid. Furthermore, the share of intermittent sources is determined. This information is used as an input to calculate the relative increase of the size of the grid needed to compensate fluctuations in electricity supply. Two meta-analyses were used to collect reliable data on the EROI of wind turbines: Lenzen and Munksgaard (2002) Because of a larger share of intermittent energy sources in the 2050 renewable energy scenarios, it is necessary to expand the capacity and size of the electricity grid. An indication of the required increase in size is provided by KEMA (2010) The authors made a distinction between three scenarios aimed at reaching the reduction. One with 40%, 60% and 80% RES (renewable energy sources). The remainder of the emission reduction is achieved with CCS and nuclear energy. One of the conclusions of the study is that the problems associated with the intermittency of RES will most likely be solved with increased grid capacity in the future. The authors predicted an autonomous increase in the interregional transmission capacity by 39% regardless of increased renewable energy sources, resulting in a 2050 baseline of 47 GW. In the 40% and 80% renewable energy scenario the grid is expected to expand by a factor 2.2 and 3.7 respectively. The 40% RES scenario was used as an approximation for the low energy and medium energy demand scenarios in this study, as they both have a share of almost 40% (36%) intermittent RES. The 80% RES scenario is used as an approximation for the high energy demand scenario (with a share of 95% intermittent RES). Despite the levelling effect of the transmission network, the report also predicts an inevitable energy loss when electricity supply exceeds demand. This so called “curtailment” is estimated at 2% for the two scenarios and can be considered an additional network loss. The Netherlands and Switzerland were used to determine the total amount of infrastructure that is needed to build a transmission network, as sufficient information is available regarding the LV (low voltage) and MV (medium voltage) networks of both countries Based on the same data it could be concluded that the copper use contributes to 26.5% of the energy requirement of the transmission network. It could also be derived that the total amount of copper that is used in constructing the network is 1.59 Mton/EJ of yearly electricity and 3.22 Mton/EJ of yearly electricity for The Netherlands and Switzerland, respectively. The average of these two numbers, 2.18 Mton/EJ, was used for further calculations. As with calculating the changing EROI due to a higher copper GER the same was done for the GER of the transmission network. Electricity losses in the transmission network are considerable compared to other energy losses, but are unfortunately also very difficult to model. For Europe, on average these are approximately 8% of the total generation of electrical energy Because of a higher share of intermittent energy sources, a relatively higher transportation distance is necessary to transport electricity between the producers, which in turn leads to higher electricity losses. The size of this effect is difficult to determine since it depends on many uncertain factors and has never been tested in a large scale transmission network. The following rough (!) and possibly conservative calculation was made. When assuming a relatively efficient network as that of The Netherlands (5.6% network losses), and taking into account that 60% of the grid expansion would lead to longer average transportation distances (60% of the current losses are found in the MV and HV networks which are mainly expected to grow In this study, three factors were considered that have an influence on the future copper requirement: Autonomous growth of the copper consumption, the additional copper demand as a result of the build-up of a renewable energy system and the amount of recycling. For the autonomous copper consumption growth a common annual growth of 2% was chosen For each of the three 2050 scenarios the additional demand for copper was calculated. The main copper requiring applications considered when determining the total amount of copper are wind turbines (2 ton Cu/MW), HVDC (High Voltage Direct Current) cables (5.7 ton cu/MW capacity), and the transmission network (2.2 Mton copper/EJ transported electricity) The amount of copper that is discarded in a certain year largely dictates how much can be recycled. The in-use stock is obviously not suitable for recycling, but also tailings from beneficiation (too low ore grade) and landfills (very inefficient to recycle even under optimal circumstances) are very unlikely sources of copper Copper is primarily used in the following end-use applications: 1) Buildings 2) (Electrical) Infrastructure 3) Transportation and 4) Industrial equipment. Each of these categories has a different typical use phase and a different typical recycling rate (definition here: share of the end-of-life metal that is recycled again). The respective figures were derived from Graedel et al. (2002) Next to using the current recycling rate to predict future amounts of secondary copper, an “increased recycling rate” scenario has been constructed. Because of all the mentioned limitations, it seems very unlikely to demand a recycling rate higher than 70%. This was therefore chosen as an upper limit in this study. Eight scenarios were prepared; the three energy demand scenarios and the baseline scenario with a normal and high recycling rate. The additional copper used that is needed for the RES systems was assumed to be evenly spread over the 40 years until 2050.   By applying the determined effects of ore grade and depth on the GER to the data regarding the distribution of copper (in terms of grade, tonnage and depth), the cumulative primary copper energy supply curve can be constructed. For each of the three energy scenarios, the amount of additionally needed copper is calculated as shown in The effect of an expanded electricity grid is substantial. Even in the medium energy demand scenario, setting up a new renewable energy system will require an amount of copper – on top of the copper needed for other applications – that is larger than the current reserve base (±1E+3 Mton) (!). The total amount of copper that is needed in the baseline scenario (so regardless of constructing a more electrified renewable energy system) is already quite considerable. When assuming an average yearly growth in copper consumption of 2%, the total cumulative produced primary copper in 2050 will amount to 0.9E+8 Mton (at a recycling rate of 43%) or 0.8E+3 Mton (at a recycling rate of 70%). In other words, if current growth in copper consumption in conventional applications continues, or even this decreases somewhat, an amount of copper almost the size of the current reserve base will be used up by 2050. Without major technological breakthroughs this will result in a doubling of the energy requirement for primary copper production. In The total amount of primary copper results from adding the amount of copper needed in the baseline scenario to the additional copper that is needed in the different scenarios, taking into account the recycling rate. This is done for each consecutive year up to 2050. For the high energy demand scenario the required amount of primary copper exceeds the amount of primary copper available (!) so the highest GER in the supply curve is used for further calculations (although it can already be concluded that the high energy demand scenario will probably not become reality because of the lack of sufficient amounts of copper). The first column from the right gives the aggregated GER for producing copper, taking into account recycling and technological improvements in secondary copper production (here, a 30% efficiency improvement is assumed). The aggregated GER figures show that the impact of copper scarcity will have a large effect on the GER of copper, since this factor increases by a factor 2.3–7. Furthermore, one observation that can be made is that the primary/secondary copper ratios – and therefore also the primary copper GER – do not differ much when comparing the normal and increased recycling scenarios. The reason for this is, that even at a high recycling rate the total amount of secondary copper is relatively small. This flow of copper depends on the amount of copper that was put into use about 30 years ago and is now discarded, which is much smaller than the total amount of copper that is needed today. Even if the recycling rate would be 100% it would not be possible to fulfil all copper needs with secondary copper. For example, only 51% could in that case be produced via recycling in the medium energy demand scenario, based on the models used in this study. In The major cause of energy losses is the loss of heat in the transmission network, something that is currently also happening to a lesser extent, but which is practically never taken into account in EROI (or energy payback time) calculations. Scarcity of copper and the resulting increase in GER of copper production have a relatively small influence on the EROI decrease. This can for instance been seen when considering the difference between the new and old EROI of an individual wind turbine, which is only affected by a higher copper GER. In In this study, only the ore grade-GER and deposit depth-GER relationships are analysed. This is mainly due to limited data availability. Next to these factors, there are additional effects that lead to a higher GER (gross energy requirement) and therefore contribute to the problem. This includes: smaller mineral grain sizes (leading to additional grinding), smaller metal seams, more minerals with higher chemical bonding energy and more remote deposits It also goes beyond the scope of this study to model the remoteness of deposits or changing conditions found at different depths in detail. Among other things, this would give a better idea where underground mining would be needed and where one can resort to open pit mining. Even if this were understood better, it would be difficult to translate this to the demand for energy, since contradictory data exists regarding the difference in energy requirement for these two types of mining. It is likely that underground mining will require much more energy Nonetheless, ore grade is widely recognised as the main factor that determines the minimum energy requirement for production Another factor that is only partly accounted for in the model is technological progress. Although an increase in efficiency in secondary copper production and an increase in the future EROI of wind turbines is assumed in this study, no technological improvement was taken into account in primary copper production because of its intrinsic uncertainty. In the case of technological progress the constructed primary energy supply curve might slightly flatten in future years. Next to the characteristics of the production process, substitution can also be considered a factor that can influence the overall energy requirement. This was not modelled here because there are currently no alternatives to copper (yet) that are less energy intensive. For example, aluminium could substitute copper in electricity related applications but this would double the amount of energy needed for metal production (see It is acknowledged that there are many uncertainties and assumptions involved in determining the global availability of copper. Although the study of Kesler and Wilkinson (2008) This study seems to indicate that the transition is feasible from an energy standpoint. This is valid under the condition that copper is the only resource that leads to a higher energy requirement because of scarcity. Although the reserve base of iron is three times as large as that of copper (in terms of years of production), iron production amounts to approximately 50% of the total energy requirement of the electrical supply system (Can be found in more detail in the The sensitivity analyses of all the input variables that influence the copper GER or the wind turbine EROI offer a number of insights. In general, it can be said the EROI values are quite robust. Among the inputs to the EROI calculations the network losses can be considered the major uncertain factor, yet unfortunately also one of the larger ones. A 50% variation in network losses would result in a 5% change in EROI, which is the largest variation found in this analysis. Considering that the EROI changed by 15% in the medium energy demand scenario as a result of the different factors, this is still a relatively small difference. The primary copper GER varies somewhat more under the influence of variations in the input variables. A changed amount of additional energy needed per additional unit of depth results in a different GER especially when the original value (2.9 MJ/kg Cu per 100 m) was set too low. A value derived from an earlier study Based on the methodology used in this study a new LCA(Life Cycle Assessment) methodology for assessing mineral depletion is presented here. With this approach, the current and future aggregated GER of a mineral can be used as an indicator of its (change in) scarcity.  A scenario of the development of the aggregated GER of a mineral as shown in The most simple (but not oversimplified) way to include these two factors is to assign equal weight to current and future impacts. This means taking the average GER over a predefined period of time. One way to justify this average indicator, as opposed to using a marginal approach to quantify the GER change, is that it actually represents the expected total energy use needed for mineral production in the predefined time period. To a large degree this methodology complies with a general framework proposed by Steward and Weidema (2005) Furthermore, the authors conclude that often too little attention is paid to the disposal phase of materials and propose that an A comparable approach, also aimed at determining the quality of material/energy stocks and flows, is suggested by Valero and Valero (2011) Current methodologies that are used to identify scarcity related problems (e.g., with the concept of abiotic depletion in LCAs) are mainly based on reserve estimates. These estimates have proven to poorly predict future scarcity, since they have not changed much despite increasing production. In the last two decades, reserves in the major copper producing countries have increased somewhat in spite of increased production worldwide. Reserve/production (R/P) and reserve base/production (RB/P) values have remained practically constant for approximately 35 and 60 years respectively There are also some important difficulties associated with the use of this methodology. This has mainly to do with uncertainties in the scenario calculations and the fact that the methodology is very data intensive. For copper, much information exists, with regard to geological availability and distribution as well as for energy requirement in mineral processing or the size of in-use stocks and the amount of recycling. Although it would require much additional research to apply the methodology to other minerals, it would also provide society with a much more reliable indicator of resource availability. The EROI (energy return on investment) of wind turbines combined with the electricity transmission system in a 100% renewable energy system in 2050 is approximately 15% lower than currently typically estimated. This is due to various energy losses such as building and maintaining the transmission grid, network losses and an increased GER (gross energy requirement) for copper. The higher GER of producing primary copper, resulting from mineral scarcity, has a relatively small influence on the EROI decrease: 3% of the original value. The major decrease in efficiency can be attributed to heat losses in the transmission network, something that is currently also happening to a lesser extent, but which has not been taken into account in EROI (or energy payback time) calculations. The outcome of the EROI calculations can be considered promising, but it relies on some assumed preconditions that need to be fulfilled, such as a more efficient future copper production, a higher future EROI of wind turbines and the discovery of many new copper deposits. Actual scarcity could be at least as big a problem as a higher energy requirement for producing copper. Nonetheless, this study seems to indicate that the transition is feasible from an energy point of view and when only considering copper (as opposed to other materials). Although the effect of copper scarcity on the EROI of wind turbine technology is small, this study shows that the impact of copper scarcity will have a large effect on the GER of copper. The aggregated GER of copper (a combination of primary and secondary copper production) will increase by a factor 2–7, depending on technological progress, the amount of recycling and the future electricity demand. One other clear conclusion can be drawn with respect to recycling. In a growing world economy with an increasing in-use stock of copper, recycling will play a relatively small role. This is the case even when the recycling rate is high, because the amount of copper that can be recycled at a certain moment depends on the amount of copper that was put into use decades ago, and this quantity is insignificant compared to the amount of copper that is needed now. In general, it can be stated that, although this study is aimed at understanding the influence of copper scarcity on the energy supply in a future renewable energy system, the inverse appears to be equally relevant: The increased copper requirement resulting from this new energy system leads to scarcity, expressed by a significantly larger energy requirement for copper production. Based on this research, a new scarcity related methodology is recommended. This study provides a dynamic way of looking at the energy requirement for producing copper which can potentially also be used for other minerals. In LCA studies this approach could prove useful, particularly when making energy related calculations for future scenarios. Also, with regard to determining scarcity, the approach could provide a more accurate way of looking at abiotic depletion. Reserves, currently often used to assess scarcity, have hardly changed in the last decades despite increased production and may well not change in the near future. In contrast, the energy requirement for mineral production is likely to increase, making the method a potentially more meaningful scarcity indicator.  Supplementary data related to this article can be found at