The “rise time” required to achieve a steady pressure reading in a capillary rheometer operated at constant piston speed can be very short or very long depending on the amount of the material in the barrel, its isothermal compressibility, the flow rate and the geometrical characteristics of the dies used [S.G. Hatzikiriakos, J.M. Dealy, Start-up pressure transients in a capillary rheometer, Polym. Eng. Sci. 34 (1994) 493–499]. When a short die having a large diameter is used, a maximum can also be obtained in the pressure transient, which is solely due to the compressibility of the material. This phenomenon is explained by means of a viscous mathematical model including compressibility, whose predictions are compared with experiments for a molten linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE).When a constant piston-speed capillary rheometer is used to measure the viscosity of a material, the time required to reach a steady driving pressure can be very long when (i) the length-to-diameter ratio ( Although the isothermal compressibility of molten polymers is very small (usually of the order 10 Following the work of Hatzikiriakos and Dealy Another phenomenon that might occur during capillary rheometry is a maximum in the pressure versus time transient under certain conditions. To the best of our knowledge this phenomenon has not be studied before, particularly in the case of pressure-driven flows of molten polymers by taking into account the full reservoir in a 2D flow. A recent study Therefore, we first report here the results of experiments carried out in a capillary rheometer using capillary dies of various diameters and lengths for a molten polyethylene in order to determine the parameters that influence the rate of pressure build-up with emphasis on the existence of the maximum value in the pressure transients. Secondly, a full 2D axisymmetric flow simulation is performed that takes compressibility and the amount of the material in the reservoir into account. The flow simulation is found to capture the main features of the observed phenomena, such as the rise time as well as the shape of the The experiments were carried out for a linear low-density polyethylene (LL3001, hexane copolymer from ExxonMobil of melt index 1 and density 0.917 The rheology of the material was determined by using the parallel-plate geometry of 25 The isothermal compressibility, However, in the range of pressures applied in the experiments (0.001  Three dies were used for studying the effect of compressibility during start-up flow in a capillary. The die characteristics are given in    In what follows, a mathematical model is developed and numerical simulations are undertaken to study these effects in order to gain a better understanding of the origin of the existence of maximum in the pressure transients. We consider the time-dependent Navier–Stokes equations for weakly compressible materials under isothermal creeping flow conditions. These are written as The viscous stresses are given for inelastic non-Newtonian compressible fluids by the relation The tensor The relationship between the stresses and the rates-of-strain is given by an appropriate rheological constitutive equation. In the present work we use the Carreau–Yasuda model of pseudoplasticity for the viscosity The above rheological model is introduced into the conservation of momentum (Eq. symmetry along AB ( no slip along the walls CSDE ( along the inflow boundary EA, fully developed velocity profile ( along the outflow boundary BC, a zero radial velocity and a zero axial surface traction are imposed ( The reference pressure is also set to zero at point B. Here we ignore any possible (but small) exit pressure losses due to extrudate swell after the die exit. The initial conditions are:    All lengths are scaled with the die radius The compressibility parameter ranges from 0 (incompressible fluids) to 0.001 (weakly compressible fluids). The numerical solution is obtained with the Finite Element Method (FEM), employing as primary variables the two velocities and pressure ( For the solution in the A partial view of the finite element meshes used in the simulations is shown in Another feature of the solution is the imposition of the flow rate at entry and based on that flow rate, the inlet velocity profile is found by one-dimensional FEM taking into account the model under study, i.e. Flow simulations have been performed using the Carreau–Yasuda model with the parameters listed in The compressible results for the transient wall pressure at entry are shown for die #8 in Consequently, the simulations are carried out and presented for die #9, which has a longer die land ( Finally, the simulations are carried out for die #14, which has a somewhat short die land ( To understand some of the discrepancies found above, it is instructive to look at the effect of reservoir length on the pressure transients. This is done in The effect of compressibility is more evident in One may argue that part of the discrepancies is due to the viscoelastic nature of the polymer. It is, however, worth mentioning that LLDPE is not highly viscoelastic (as much as a branched LDPE melt would be) and that in start-up of steady shear the maximum in the stress response at high shear rates occurs in times considerably less than 1 Transient capillary rheometry of an LLDPE melt was studied both experimentally and theoretically. Different die designs were employed that have demonstrated the effect of compressibility in the transient pressure distributions for a wide range of shear rates. Short dies produce a rapid increase to a maximum, followed by a steady-state plateau. Long dies or dies with small radii do not produce such pronounced maxima, but need significantly longer times to reach their steady-state values. The simulations based on the compressible conservation equations have shown that the main effect is a combination of die geometry and compressibility. Parametric studies have shown that without compressibility the pressure jumps to its steady-state value, while compressibility serves to delay this accordingly. The effect of compressibility is thus the most important in understanding these pressure build-ups in start-up capillary experiments of polymer melts. Other issues worth exploring are the effects of viscoelasticity and viscous heating for the higher die length and the higher shear rates on top of compressibility. Financial assistance from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada and the General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GGET) of Greece are gratefully acknowledged.