Retail samples of vacuum-packed sliced cold smoked salmon were investigated for changes in texture, colour and expressible moisture approximately 1 week before expiry date and on the best before date. For comparison, retail samples of gravelax were also investigated. To gather information on alteration in protein caused by processing and refrigerated storage, DSC measurements were performed at the same samples and furthermore on hot smoked salmon and frozen raw material, Salmo salar. Texture parameters varied markedly between the retail samples; however, almost no clear tendencies were observable with increased refrigerated storage time while expressible moisture raised. Colour also differed considerably between the samples. Gravelax behaved almost comparable to cold smoked salmon. DSC curves taken from cold smoked salmon and gravelax were almost comparable and demonstrated that muscle proteins being largely denatured by the influence of salt and cold smoking temperature compared to the raw material.At frequent intervals, German consumer magazines like “Test” and “Öko-Test” have published results of investigations on the quality of smoked salmon products commissioned by both magazines. By order of the foundation “Warentest” vacuum-packed sliced cold smoked salmon products from 22 processors were investigated for microbial quality, pollutants, description of sensory quality by experts on the best before date, chemical composition, packaging and labelling Not only in Germany but also in France and Italy such market surveys were performed Changes in the quality of vacuum-packed cold smoked salmon ( From the results obtained in the different market surveys, it becomes evident that the sensory quality of vacuum-packed sliced cold smoked salmon fluctuates remarkable when quality were assessed on the best before date. In particular, the German surveys show a lack of physical methods to characterise colour, texture and water holding. These methods allow a fast and less laborious determination of food properties of importance to consumers. The objective of the present study was therefore the use of physical methods for texture and colour measurement as well as liquid loss to monitor if there are differences between the products of different processors. Furthermore it was examined whether the differences in evaluation of these parameters on day of purchase and on the expiry date were significant or not. Additionally, the thermal stability of smoked products were investigated to answer questions regarding the native state of salmon muscle proteins or their changes caused by marginal heat treatment during cold smoking and by the adjacent refrigerated storage of the smoked products. For comparison, the thermal stability of raw material and other salmon products was investigated too. To our knowledge, DSC measurement on smoked salmon has not been performed so far. Vacuum-packed sliced cold smoked salmon (six retail packs of 200 Texture of salmon slices was characterised by instrumental texture profile analysis (TPA) for hardness, gumminess, chewiness, springiness, cohesiveness and adhesiveness, by measuring tensile force (TF) as well as penetration force (PF) measured on homogenised samples using a Texture Analyser TA.XT2 (Stable Micro Systems, Godalming, England). Measurements were performed at room temperature and were described in detail elsewhere Thermal analysis was performed using a MicroDSC VII (SETARAM, Caluire, France). Samples (300–500 The results were statistically evaluated using the software package STATISTICA StatSoft, Inc. (1996), Tulsa, OK, USA. TPA allows to evaluate different texture attributes like hardness, chewiness, gumminess, adhesiveness, springiness and cohesiveness ( Within the cold smoked products only sample B showed a higher TF compared with the other samples. This sample was also pronounced elastic ( When investigating the effects of different parameters in the smoking process on microstructure and texture of salmon fillet, it was found that the force required to shear the smoked fillets was significantly higher than for the unprocessed fillets, but was not found to be related to the different salting and smoking processes LHC decreased with increasing storage time at refrigerated temperature ( The multitude of possibilities to influence the colour of smoked salmon is mirrored in Lightness ( The colour difference Δ It can be said that colour differences between the retail samples notwithstanding the labelled use of Norwegian farmed salmon in all products were considerable and will be realised by an attentively consumer. Colour of cold smoked salmon is of outmost importance for the quality evaluation and purchasing decision by consumers Comparing our results ( Differential scanning calorimetry is frequently used to investigate the effects of different technological operations on fish muscle proteins, e.g. heating, freezing, pressurising The curve of Atlantic salmon complies with that of coho salmon ( The DSC curve of cold smoked salmon made clear that both myosin and actin peak had almost disappeared. Because cold smoking temperature varies in the range from 20 to 30 The DSC curves of retail samples obtained at 1st and 2nd investigation at which the temperature range from 30 to 70 The aim of the study included the application of physical methods for quality assessment on retail samples of vacuum-packed sliced cold smoked salmon. For comparison, retail samples of gravelax were also investigated. Results obtained verify marked differences of the texture parameter between the retail samples; however, almost no clear tendencies were observable with increasing refrigerated storage. Only the cohesiveness as well as the penetration force seemed to be decreasing on expiry date. The same was observed for liquid holding capacity. Colour as one of the most decisive parameters for purchasing differed considerably between samples and according to calculated colour differences samples could be discriminated by naked eyes. Gravelax behaved almost comparable to cold smoked salmon. These differences between retail samples are signs of the high biological variability of the raw material since in all cases farmed Norwegian salmon was used. Farming as well as processing are obviously not able to compensate biologically caused differences. Therefore, consumers have to be aware of the fact that cold smoked salmon will vary in colour, texture and water binding even when same raw material as well as processing method was used. It is recommended that the products should be consumed as early as possible to avoid storage-caused alteration in cohesiveness and LHC. Results of DSC measurement inform on the reason of the texture, LHC and colour changes observed which are to be seen in that muscle proteins being largely denatured or degraded by the influence of salt and cold smoking temperature. Furthermore, DSC proved to be useful in detecting abnormalities in temperature schedules regulated by law as in the case of hot smoked salmon products. The skilful technical assistance of Ms. Isabella Delgado Blas is acknowledged.