Artificial lift is defined as a system that adds energy to the wellbore fluid column with the objective of initiating and enhancing production from the well. Artificial lift is needed when reservoir drives do not sustain acceptable rates or cause fluids to flow at all in some cases. Lift processes transfer energy down hole or decrease fluid density in wellbore to reduce the hydrostatic load on formation. Artificial lift systems use a range of operating principles, including pumping and gas lifting.
                  ELimination Et Choix Traduisant la REalité (ELECTRE) model or method is one of the most prevalent Multi Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) methods. MCDM is an approach employed to solve problems involving selection from among a finite number of criteria. An MCDM method specifies how attribute information is to be processed in order to arrive at a choice.
                  In this paper, a novel software method based on ELECTRE model as a mathematical optimizer has been presented for artificial lift systems selection in petroleum industry validated with several certain oil fields data (such as: the Iranian Salman, Nosrat and Kuh-E-Mond (MD-6) oil fields) that finally, a considerable accordance between ELECTRE model program final results and the fields operational results has been found.When a reservoir lacks sufficient energy for oil, gas and water to flow from wells at desired rates, artificial lift supplemental production methods can help. Major types of artificial lift are Gas Lift (GL) design (continuous Gas Lift, intermittent Gas Lift) and pumping (Electrical Submersible Pump (ESP), Progressive Cavity Pump (PCP), Sucker Rod Pump (SRP), Hydraulic jet type Pump (HP)). As the well is produced, the potential energy is converted to kinetic energy associated with the fluid movement. This dissipates the potential energy of the reservoir, thereby causing the flow rate to decrease and the flow to cease eventually. It may be economical at any point in the life of a well to maintain or even to increase the production rate by the use of artificial lift to offset the dissipation of reservoir energy. MCDM refers to making decisions in the presence of multiple, usually conflicting criteria. The problems of MCDM can be broadly classified into two categories: Multiple Attribute Decision Making (MADM) and Multiple Objective Decision Making (MODM), depending on whether the problem is a selection problem or a design problem. MODM methods have decision variable values that are determined in a continuous or integer domain, with either an infinitive or a large number of choices, the best of which should satisfy the decision maker's constraints and preference priorities. MADM methods, on the other hand, are generally discrete, with a limited number of predetermined alternatives. By now, the usage of each of the artificial lift methods throughout the world has been in a manner that for GL, ESP, SRP, PCP, HP as different artificial lift methods has been equal to 50%, 30%, 17%, > The most studies in this field have been on the basis of operational considerations by now and not based on the scientific MCDM methods, despite their great importance which implies one of the artificial lift selection in previous procedures imperfections. However, about the previous artificial lift selection procedures, it can be said that some researchers have studied on this matter briefly expressed as the following: In (1981), Neely considered the geographical and environmental circumstances as the dominant factors for artificial lift selection. In (1988), Valentine used Optimal Pumping Unit Search (OPUS), a smart integrated system possessing the characteristics of artificial lift methods, for artificial lift selection. In (1993), Bucaram and Clegg studied on some of the operational and designing factors based on artificial lift methods overall capability comparison and design. In (1994), Espin used SEDLA, a computer program possessing the characteristics of artificial lift methods, for artificial lift selection. In (1995), Heinze used “the Decision Tree” for artificial lift selection, mostly based on a longtime economic analysis. The paper objective is to specify ELECTRE model as a (the optimum and validated) predicted method for artificial lift selection from among the following discussed and used five MCDM models: SAW (Simple Additive Weighting) model TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution) model ELECTRE (ELimination Et Choix Traduisant la REalité) model WPM (Weighted Product Model) VIKOR (VIšekriterijumsko KOmpromisno Rangiranje), compromise ranking model The usage of artificial lift methods throughout the world by now has been recently reported ( It is necessary to mention that Sucker Rod Pump (SRP) is a positive displacement pump that compresses liquid by the motion of a piston. The piston is actuated by a string of sucker rods that extends from the bottomhole pump to the pumping unit at the surface. The rod or structure may limit rate at depth ( A Progressive Cavity Pump (PCP) is a kind of pump which transfers fluid by means of a sequence of small, fixed shape, discrete cavities, that move through the pump as its rotor turns. The cavities taper down toward their ends and overlap with their neighbors, so that, in general, no flow pulsing is caused by the arrival of cavities at the outlet ( An Electrical Submersible Pump (ESP) is a dynamic displacement, multistage centrifugal turbine pump coupled by a short shaft to a downhole electrical motor. The motor is supplied with electrical power by a cable extending to the surface. ESP systems have a wide range of applications and offer an efficient and economical lift method. Even if sand production, high Gas Oil Ratio (GOR), and viscosity are concerned, the right ESP for the well can be found to improve production. From onshore high water cut applications to complex offshore, deepwater, or subsea applications, a system to meet the required needs is available ( A Hydraulic jet type Pump (HP) is an ejector type dynamic displacement pump operated by a stream of high pressure power fluid converging into a jet in the nozzle of the pump. Downstream from the nozzle, the high velocity, low pressure jet is mixed with the fluid of well. The stream of the mixture is then expanded in a diffuser, and as the flow velocity is dropped, the pressure is built up. The fluid flow can carry some corrosive additives into wellbore and functions as a maintenance material. The constraints to use HP are related to high GOR or contamination in the fluid flow bringing about low efficiency of the pump at last ( As well, about Gas Lift (GL), gas is injected into the tubing string to lighten the fluid column and allows the well to flow when it does not flow naturally. The injected gas is mixed with produced fluid, decreases the flowing gradient in the production string, and thus lowers the bottomhole flowing pressure. The basic objective of gas lift design is to equip wells in such a manner as to compress a minimum amount of gas to produce a maximum amount of oil (  In (1981), Neely designated some artificial lift methods such as: SRP, ESP, HP, GL and studied about the application circumstances, advantages, disadvantages and constraints of each method. The geographical and environmental circumstances as the dominant factors for artificial lift selection and also some other subordinate factors such as: reservoir pressure, productivity index, reservoir fluid properties and inflow performance relationship were considered by him ( In (1988), Valentine used Optimal Pumping Unit Search (OPUS) for artificial lift selection. Indeed OPUS was a smart integrated system possessing the characteristics of artificial lift methods. OPUS had the capability to control the technical and financial aspects of artificial lift methods. The production system was consisted of the downhole pump up to the surface facilities (stock tank). The technical and financial evaluation of this procedure was done by means of some specific computer algorithms. Therefore, knowing the primary required investment value, costs (maintenance, equipment) and technical ability of each artificial lift method, artificial lift selection was done ( Also in (1988), Clegg mentioned some economic factors such as: revenue, operational and investment costs as a basis for artificial lift selection. He believed that the selected artificial lift method could have the best production rate with the least value of operational costs ( In (1993), Bucaram, Clegg and Heln studied on some of the operational and designing characteristics of artificial lift methods categorized into 3 types. They were based on artificial lift methods overall capability comparison and design, some specific operational factors and artificial lift methods factors probably causing some specific problems respectively ( In (1994), Espin used SEDLA for artificial lift selection. Indeed SEDLA was a computer program possessing the characteristics of artificial lift methods. It was composed of 3 modules based on an information bank of human activities, the theoretical knowledge of artificial lift methods, and the economic evaluation of artificial lift methods respectively. Therefore, the artificial lift selection was done on the basis of profit value ( In (1995), Heinze used “the Decision Tree” for artificial lift selection. The most major factor in it was based on a longtime economic analysis. Also, the artificial lift methods evaluation was based on operational costs, primary investment, life time cost and energy efficiency. Ultimately, considering these factors besides the decision maker, the artificial lift selection was done (   SAW model could be applied for the evaluation of a Personalised Geographical Information System. The proposed system has been evaluated in comparison to a standard GIS using linguistic terms. These terms were further translated to fuzzy numbers in order to calculate a crisp value for each GIS aggregating all the criteria taking into account. The comparison of the crisp value for the two GISs revealed that the Personalised GIS has been friendlier and more useful than the standard one ( SAW model could be applied in group decision making for facility location selection with objective/subjective attributes. The proposed system integrated SAW model to evaluate facility location alternatives. Finally, a numerical example has illustrated the procedure (  TOPSIS model could be applied as a data classifier. The proposed model could provide additional efficient tool for comparative analysis of data sets. TOPSIS model has been applied in Multiple Criteria Decision Analysis based on D.Wu's data mining model. It has been applied in supply chain complexity evaluation and simulation used to validate the proposed model ( TOPSIS model could be applied as a new model for mining method selection of mineral deposit based on Fuzzy Decision Making. The Fuzzy Decision Making (FDM) software tool has been employed to develop a Fuzzy TOPSIS based model. Application of this model with various values (crisp, linguistic and fuzzy) of the deposit eliminated the existing disadvantages of other methods (  In mining engineering, ELECTRE model could be applied for achieving some outranking relationships between post mining land uses through mined land suitability analysis. Final results showed that, there were two non dominated land uses for the considered example, industrial and pasture. However by increasing indifference threshold limit, the non dominated set reduced to a single alternative that was pasture land use (  WPM could be applied for carbon sequestration capacity enhancement and economic policy development for liping county using integrated assessment that the increasing of the amount of carbon sequestration and sustainable economic development have been desired (  VIKOR model could be applied for the selection of suppliers based on Rough Set Theory and VIKOR algorithm. The proposed methodology consisted of two parts: The RST was a fairly new methodology developed for dealing with imprecise, uncertain, and vague information. According to index systems for selection of suppliers, VIKOR algorithm has been used to select the best suppliers ( VIKOR model could be applied as a Multi Criteria Decision Analysis of alternative fuel busses for public transportation. The result has shown that the hybrid electric bus has been the most suitable substitute bus for Taiwan urban areas in the short and median term. But, if the cruising distance of the electric bus extends to an acceptable range, the pure electric bus could be the best alternative ( It has been essential to mention to the mathematical and logical strategy and calculations of the novel software method based on MCDM models particularly ELECTRE model. As a relationship among the SAW, TOPSIS, ELECTRE, WPM and VIKOR MCDM models, all of these MCDM mathematical approaches can be employed to solve problems involving selection from among a finite number of criteria of course with different selection exactnesses and procedures in different fields of study. So, a MCDM model specifies how attribute information can be processed in order to arrive at a choice. This model is also called as Weighted Sum Method and is the simplest and still the widest used MADM method ( The main procedure of SAW model for the selection of the best alternative from among those available has been described as bellow: At first, it was required to allocate suitable quantities ( The value of 1 (good to excellent) has been considered as 7 out of 10, the value of 2 (fair to good) has been considered as 5 out of 10 and the value of 3 (not recommended and poor) has been considered as 3 out of 10 in the following. Then, the linearly normalizing of the resulted alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix had to be done by Eq. Meanwhile, if the criteria both with positive and negative aspects were available, it was required to convert the negative ones to positive by reversing the negative ones. Then, the criteria quantities had to be weighted by means of the Entropy method, by Eqs. At last, multiplying the normalized matrix by the resulted criteria weights matrix and sorting the final resulted values, the highest value in the final resulted matrix has showed the best alternative for selection ( On the whole, it has been believed that the related calculations results and the related figures shown as ( This model was developed by The ideal solution is a hypothetical solution for which all alternatives relative to criteria attribute values ( The main procedure of TOPSIS model for the selection of the best alternative from among those available has been described as bellow: At first, it was required to allocate suitable quantities ( The value of 1 (good to excellent) has been considered as 7 out of 10, the value of 2 (fair to good) has been considered as 5 out of 10 and the value of 3 (not recommended and poor) has been considered as 3 out of 10 in the following. Then, the normalizing of the resulted alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix had to be done by Eq. Then, the criteria quantities had to be weighted by means of the Entropy method, by Eqs. Multiplying the normalized matrix by the alternatives relative to the criteria resulted weights diametrical matrix, the normalized weighted matrix has been obtained ( Then, the positive ideal (best) and the negative ideal (worst) of each criterion had to be obtained in this step ( The separation of each alternative from the ideal one has been given by the Euclidean distance in the following equations, ( The relative closeness of a particular alternative to the ideal solution, The highest value for On the whole, it has been believed that the related calculations results and the related figures shown as ( ELECTRE model is an outranking model or method to deal with Multi Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) situations in which a finite set of alternatives should be ranked from the best to the worst. One of the most important outranking models used for application in real life MCDM problems is ELECTRE model, since it is based on the construction and exploitation of a valued “outranking relation” ( The main procedure of ELECTRE model for the selection of the best alternative from among those available has been described as bellow: At first, it was required to allocate suitable quantities ( The number of the alternatives and the number of the criteria have been considered as the number of matrix rows (i) and matrix columns (j) in the alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix (decision matrix) respectively ( The relative scores of different methods relative to production, reservoir and well constraints as well as produced fluid properties and surface infrastructure constraints (all the criteria except the SCADA due to the lack of its data availability in the related reports) have been based on the Schlumberger company certain practical reports ( Here, the optimization problem for the ELECTRE model is defined mathematically in the following by the Eqs. The value of 1 (good to excellent) has been considered as 7 out of 10, the value of 2 (fair to good) has been considered as 5 out of 10 and the value of 3 (not recommended and poor) has been considered as 3 out of 10 in the following. Then, the normalizing of the resulted alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix had to be done by Eq. Then, the criteria quantities had to be weighted by means of the Entropy method, by Eqs. Multiplying the normalized matrix ( Then, the determination of the harmonic and the non harmonic complexes had to be done in regard to the criteria with positive or negative aspects. It meant that in the comparison between two alternatives (for instance, SRP with PCP), a criterion with positive aspect and higher value as well a criterion with negative aspect and lower value have been determined as the harmonic complexes of the two related alternatives and if vice versa, as the non harmonic complexes of the two related alternatives. So, the harmonic and the non harmonic related matrixes have been obtained. As well, the effective harmonic (H) and non harmonic (G) related matrixes had to be calculated by means of the division of the harmonic and the non harmonic matrixes all values summation respectively by the harmonic matrix number of all values ( At last, multiplying the effective harmonic matrix (H) by the effective non harmonic matrix (G), the effective overall matrix (F) for the final result has been obtained. The overall matrix column possessing the minimum number of unit values “1” (or the least column summation) has been considered as the best alternative for selection, ( On the whole, it has been believed that the related calculations results and the related figures shown as ( The main procedure of WPM for the selection of the best alternative from among those available has been described as bellow: At first, it was required to allocate suitable quantities ( The number of the alternatives and the number of the criteria have been considered as the number of matrix rows (i) and matrix columns (j) in the alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix (decision matrix) respectively ( The relative scores of different methods relative to production, reservoir and well constraints as well as produced fluid properties and surface infrastructure constraints (all the criteria except the SCADA due to the lack of its data availability in the related reports) have been based on the Schlumberger company certain practical reports ( The value of 1 (good to excellent) has been considered as 7 out of 10, the value of 2 (fair to good) has been considered as 5 out of 10 and the value of 3 (not recommended and poor) has been considered as 3 out of 10 in the following. Then, the linearly normalizing of the resulted alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix had to be done by Eq. Meanwhile, if the criteria both with positive and negative aspects were available, it was required to convert the negative ones to positive by reversing the negative ones. Then, the criteria quantities had to be weighted by means of the Entropy method, by Eqs. After the linearly normalization of all attribute values ( The overall or composite performance score of an alternative has been given by Eq. The alternative with the highest On the whole, it has been believed that the related calculations results and the related figures shown as ( The Compromise solution is a feasible solution that is the closest to the ideal solution that a compromise means an agreement established by mutual concession. The compromise solution method, also known as VIKOR (VIšekriterijumsko KOmpromisno Rangiranje) model, was introduced as one applicable technique to implement within MADM ( VIKOR model was developed to solve MCDM problems with conflicting (different units) criteria. This model focuses on ranking and selecting from a set of alternatives in the presence of conflicting criteria, and on proposing compromise solution ( The main procedure of VIKOR model for the selection of the best alternative from among those available has been described as bellow: At first, it was required to allocate suitable quantities ( The number of the alternatives and the number of the criteria have been considered as the number of matrix rows (i) and matrix columns (j) in the alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix (decision matrix) respectively ( The relative scores of different methods relative to production, reservoir and well constraints as well as produced fluid properties and surface infrastructure constraints (all the criteria except the SCADA due to the lack of its data availability in the related reports) have been based on the Schlumberger company certain practical reports ( The value of 1 (good to excellent) has been considered as 7 out of 10, the value of 2 (fair to good) has been considered as 5 out of 10 and the value of 3 (not recommended and poor) has been considered as 3 out of 10 in the following. Then, the normalizing of the resulted alternatives relative to the criteria quantities matrix had to be done by Eq. Then, the criteria quantities had to be weighted by means of the Entropy method, by Eqs. Then the following The alternative with the lowest On the whole, it has been believed that the related calculations results and the related figures shown as (  In this paper, a novel software method (by means of Visual Basic.net code) based on ELECTRE model has been presented for artificial lift system selection in petroleum industry to decide logically with an appropriate technical efficiency and faster to reduce time and operational expenditures economically too as some of its advantages. The designed ELECTRE model computer program has been validated with several certain oil fields data (such as the Iranian Salman, Nosrat and Kuh-E- Mond (MD-6) oil fields data that Gas Lift, ESP and PCP have been resulted as the optimum artificial lift systems for them both in the fields and resulted by the ELECTRE designed computer program) and finally, a considerable accordance between the ELECTRE model program final results and the fields operational results has been found. It is considerable to appreciate and thank to the Petroleum Engineering Department of Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran and the Petroleum Engineering Department of Shahid Bahonar University of Kerman, Iran, as well as the Petroleum Development and Engineering Company (PEDEC Research and Development) Tehran, Iran backing up to study on this scientific matter in petroleum industry.