The recovery and purification of rare earth metals from electronic waste is an attractive alternative to environmentally damaging virgin mining of these metals, as the concentrations of rare earth metals are significantly higher in electronic waste than can be found naturally. It is therefore prudent to develop recycling and purification processes for these metals from electronic waste. Solvent extraction is the most commonly used technique for the purification of rare earth metals, as solvent extraction is capable of handling large volumes while maintaining high product purities. Since there is a scarcity of thermodynamic phase equilibrium data that can assist in developing such recycling processes, this study begins a series of investigations to address this gap.
                  The distribution coefficients of Y3+ and Eu3+ ions between an organic phase and an aqueous nitric acid solution, as a function of the nitric acid concentration, were measured at approximately 298 K. These are reported for systems containing an organic phase of di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (HDEHP) in a diluent; varying either the diluent or the concentration of the HDEHP. The two diluents investigated were n-nonane and n-dodecane. Measurements were conducted in a liquid-liquid equilibrium cell, with the concentration of the rare earth metals determined by ICP-OES analysis. The distribution coefficients for Y3+ and Eu3+ were shown to be inversely proportional to the aqueous acid concentration, and dependent upon both the concentration of the HDEHP in the organic phase and the diluent used. The data were used for the optimisation of a rare earth metal extraction column. the range of the data the slope of the regressed calibration curve the average concentration of the analytical calibration curve the concentration of component place-filler variable the coverage factor for the expanded uncertainties the mass of component the number of replicated ICP-OES readings the residual standard deviation of a regression the uncertainty of the expanded uncertainty of the volume the mass fraction of component of the aqueous phase the average value of the balance of the diluent or diluted fluid titrated to reach the equivalence point of the volumetric flask when the concentration of H of nitric acid of the organic phase of the NaOH of rare earth metals of the repeatability of the sample of the solution of standard of the stock standard solution of the water Rare earth metals are used in many critical components in electronic and electrical equipment, varying from hard drives, screens and batteries to electronic vehicles, and wind turbines. The term “rare earths” (RE) refers to a group of 17 chemically similar elements, including scandium, yttrium and the lanthanides from row three of the periodic table (lanthanum through to lutetium). In many current applications of RE, the individual RE must have purities of up to ‘five nines’ (99.999%). The most common processing technology for obtaining such high product purities is solvent extraction, as this technique is able to handle larger volumes of RE bearing feed liquors ( Europium and yttrium are used in many lighting applications, where their function is to give specific colours to luminophorous powders ( In the work of Most of the solvents that have been investigated for these solvent extraction processes, such as those listed by To enable the design of these solvent extraction processes, accurate phase equilibrium data, which describes the distribution of the RE between the aqueous and organic phases at different process conditions, are required. These data are necessary to determine the optimal process conditions at which the desired separations can be achieved. In the case of many of the solvents that were listed by The distribution of the RE between the aqueous and organic phases is the most common means of reporting the phase behaviour. The distribution coefficient, This definition was given by To enable the design of a solvent extraction process, Eu The data that was measured in this study were used for the optimisation of a counter-current, vibrating plate RE extraction column. This column is used to recover RE oxides from a waste luminophosphor powder produced during the recycling of electronic waste. The list of chemicals used in this study is shown in The measurements of the distribution coefficients of yttrium and europium between the acidic aqueous and the organic (solvent) phases were performed using a jacketed glass liquid–liquid equilibrium (LLE) cell with an internal capacity of 40 ml. A similar equilibrium cell was described previously by The cell had a water jacket, with the studied liquid mixture contained within the inner portion of the cell, and the temperature regulation fluid filling the cell jacket. This fluid was pumped through the cell jacket from a water reservoir which was maintained at a constant temperature using a Polyscience® temperature controller (model 7306A12E, stability of 0.01 K). The LLE cell was placed upon a magnetic stirrer plate (FMH Instruments, Model STR-M). A PTFE-coated stirrer bar (12 mm length, 4.5 mm OD) was inserted into the cell, and the magnetic coupling to the stirrer plate enabled the agitation of the contents of the cell. The speed of mixing was closely monitored, to ensure the repeatability of the measurements. A diagram of the apparatus is shown in The temperature within the LLE cell was monitored using a calibrated Pt100 temperature probe (WIKA Instruments, model TF45 class A). A Shinko Digital Indicating Controller (Shinko DIC, model ACS-13A Series 1/16 DIN) was used to monitor the temperature measured by the probe. A mass balance, (Mettler Toledo, model AB204-S) with an uncertainty of 0.001 g, was used in the synthesis of the liquid phases, as well as for the recording of the masses of the aqueous and organic solutions added into the LLE cell. The concentrations of the hydronium ion in the aqueous phase were determined by back-titration with a sodium hydroxide solution, which was prepared on-site. The metal concentrations in the aqueous phases were determined using a Perkin Elmer Optima The atmospheric pressure was monitored using the internal barometer of an automated high-pressure calibrator (Mensor, model CPC 8000, uncertainty of 0.005 kPa or 0.01% of the full range). For this investigation, dilute solutions of yttrium or europium in nitric acid were prepared on a mass basis by digestion in varying concentrations of nitric acid. Firstly, approximately 0.05 g of rare earth oxide was digested in the required mass (between 0.5 and 8 g) of 55 wt% nitric acid. The mass of acid required for the digestion and to provide the desired acid concentration was calculated prior to the digestion. After the digestion, the aqueous solution was then diluted to the correct H The organic solvent (HDEHP in either n-nonane or n-dodecane) was prepared by the dilution of a known mass of HDEHP in the diluents, in a volumetric flask. Once the aqueous and organic phases had been prepared, known masses (between 3 and 4 g) of each phase were added into the LLE cell with a syringe. The stirrer bar was inserted into the cell and the two phases were agitated for 12 h at the set temperature of T = 298.2 K. This temperature was selected as this was the approximate temperature at which the data of The H As the ICP-OES was not capable of ionising organic material, the concentration of the metals in the aqueous phase were analysed in this study. A material balance calculation was thereafter used to calculate the concentration of the metals in the organic phase. The material balance was sufficiently specified to ensure that there were no degrees of freedom. The samples from the LLE cell were further diluted by mass, using the mass balance, to ensure that the measured concentrations fell within the ranges of the ICP-OES calibration curves. The calibrations of the ICP-OES were therefore performed using standards with units of ppm (mg/kg). The temperature probe was calibrated against a WIKA Instruments CTH 6500 temperature standard probe, the calibration of which was performed by WIKA Instruments which gave the standard probe an uncertainty of The ICP-OES was calibrated with standards that were prepared on a mass basis from a stock solution of approximately 1000 ppm (mass basis of mg/kg) rare earth metal (REM) digested in a 2 wt% nitric acid solution. The contributions of the various measurements to the estimation of the uncertainty are reported in The uncertainties of the measurement of concentration of the RE by the ICP-OES was estimated based upon the GUM (Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement) ( The overall uncertainty in the concentration of the hydronium ion, H Measurements of the distribution coefficients were undertaken for four different systems. One extraction mechanism for the extraction of the RE from nitric acid solutions by HDEHP is given by Eq. A far more complex ‘colloidal’ mechanism model for the extraction has been proposed by The two variables in these systems were the RE, being either Y In a similar manner to the analysis of the data that was undertaken by The measured distribution data for the Eu + HDEHP + n-C The difference between the two studies was the manner in which analysis of the concentrations of the Eu The distribution of the Eu The distribution coefficients of Eu between the organic and aqueous phases were also measured at two different HDEHP concentrations (0.25 and 0.5 M HDEHP) for the Eu + HDEHP + n-C The distribution coefficients of Eu The distribution coefficients of Y The distribution coefficients of Y Rather than reporting on the uncertainties of the distribution coefficients directly, the concentrations of the aqueous and organic phases were reported in each of Comparing the data for Eu against the data for Y, shows that the HDEHP has a much greater affinity for Y than for Eu (more than 4 times the affinity). With this higher selectivity, at a given acid concentration, Y would be preferentially extracted to the organic phase, with Eu more likely to remain in the aqueous phase. The data measured in this study was used in the optimisation of a vibrating-plate counter-current liquid–liquid extraction column designed and commissioned for the recovery of RE metals from a luminophosphor powder. The RE metals are leached from the luminophosphor powder with a nitric acid solution. The advantage of using waste material as a feedstock is the relatively high concentration of the RE metals in the leachate in comparison to extracting RE metals from minerals ( The distribution coefficients of europium and yttrium between an organic phase, consisting of HDEHP in an alkane diluent, and an aqueous phase of nitric acid solutions were measured. The concentration of the nitric acid in the aqueous solution, the concentration of the HDEHP in the organic phase and the diluent were varied to establish the relationship between the distribution coefficients and these variables. The uncertainties in the data were calculated according to the GUM. For both europium and yttrium, it was found that the distribution coefficients were inversely related to each other, with higher distribution coefficients occurring when the aqueous phase acid concentration was lower and vice versa. The distribution coefficients were found to be directly proportional to the concentration of the HDEHP in the organic phase, with greater HDEHP concentrations resulting in greater distribution coefficients. The chain length of the diluent was inversely related to the sensitivity of the distribution ratio to changes in acid concentration in the aqueous phase. With shorter chain n-alkane diluents, the rate of change of the distribution ratio with change in acid concentration in the aqueous phase was reduced. Under the conditions studied in this work, at a given acid concentration in the aqueous phase, yttrium had a greater affinity for the organic phase than europium. The data were used to optimise the performance of a liquid–liquid extraction column for the recovery of RE metals from a luminophosphor powder, allowing a purity of RE metals of greater than 99.5%.  This work is based on the research supported by the The assistance of Thandiwe Mhlongo in the measurement of some of the data points is acknowledged. The Ishikawa diagram describing the sources of uncertainty for the measurement of concentration of the REM by ICP-OES is provided in As a mass basis was used for the dilution of the samples, this minimised the variables that contributed to the uncertainty, with only the uncertainties in mass of the sample and the diluent contributing to this uncertainty. Therefore, the uncertainty in the concentration from the dilution of the samples, The uncertainty associated with the application of the calibration curve to the measured intensities from the ICP-OES considered the uncertainties of the stock solution used in preparing the standards and the uncertainties in preparing these standards. As these standards were once again prepared using masses, the contribution to these uncertainties emanated mostly from the uncertainty of the balance. The estimated uncertainty of the concentration of the stock solution, Using this, the uncertainty in concentration of each of the standards prepared from the stock solution, To determine the contribution to the uncertainty by the use of a calibration curve fitted to standards with a least-squares regression, the equation presented by In the case where multiple measurements are made at the same conditions, and the mean of these data were reported, there would be a contribution of repeatability to the uncertainty. This uncertainty could be estimated from the relative standard deviation of the data, as given in Eq. The law of the propagation of uncertainties was thereafter used to combine all these uncertainties to give the combined uncertainty of the distribution coefficients. A coverage factor of The overall uncertainty in the concentration of the hydronium ion, H At least 3 titrations were performed for each sample. As the repeatability is a B-type uncertainty, the uncertainty contribution from repeatability was calculated by Eq. The purities are also a type B contribution to the overall uncertainty. The uncertainty in the concentration of the NaOH solution was determined using Eq. The estimation of the uncertainty of the consumption of the NaOH solution in the titration up to the equivalence point, The uncertainty from the calibration of the burette is a triangular distribution and is therefore calculated by dividing the limit of accuracy for the burette by Therefore, the contribution of the uncertainty in the consumption of NaOH solution to the combined [H Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: