A simple, rapid and environmentally friendly analytical methodology is developed for extraction of pesticides (diazinon, chlorpyrifos and trifluralin) from sediment samples based on a technique called low density miniaturized homogenous liquid–liquid extraction (LDMHLLE) prior gas chromatography mass spectrometry determination. The method based on homogeneous liquid–liquid extraction with methanol containing n-hexane as a solvent of lower density than water (n-hexane). After addition of water, n-hexane solvent immediately forms a distinct water immiscible phase at the top of the vial, which can be easily separated and injected to the GC/MS instrument for quantification. Acquisition was performed in the selected ion monitoring mode. The limits of detection were estimated for the individual pesticides as 3Sb (three times of the standard deviation of baseline) of the measured chromatogram for pesticides. The proposed method is very fast, simple, and sensitive without any need for stirring and centrifugation and applied to real sediment samples, successfully.Pesticides in soils and sediment continue to be studied more than any other environmental contaminant, because they are used widely to control pests that affect agricultural crops and pests in the home, yards, and gardens. As a result of low concentration of relevant analytes in sediment samples, great variety of pesticides, the development and the application of methodologies for determining pesticides and in sediment is a challenging task In recent years, some miniaturized extraction procedures as an alternative for traditional extraction have been developed and introduced. Some of this method containing: single-drop microextraction Some of these methods involve laborious, time consuming and expensive for sediment extraction. Thus it is important to introduce/develop an alternative method for extraction of pollutant from sediment. Recently, we introduce a new method for extraction of PAHs from soil samples based on homogeneous liquid–liquid extraction In all HLLE methods, solvents of higher density than water (i.e., chlorinated solvents) have been used, and there is no report to use low density miniaturized homogeneous liquid–liquid extraction (LDMHLLE) for determination of pesticides from soil samples. In this work, our novel low density miniaturized homogeneous liquid–liquid extraction (LDMHLLE) was developed for extraction of three pesticides from sediment samples. Analytical grade methanol and n-hexane were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) and were used without further purification. Purred water prepared on a Direct-Q 3 UV with a pump system (Millipore, Molshein, France). Diazinon, chlorpyrifos and trifluralin prepared from Ehrnestorfer (Augsburg, Germany). The working solutions were prepared at appropriate concentration from stock solutions. The extracted compounds were analyzed on a 6890N Agilent gas chromatograph coupled to a 5975C Agilent mass-selective detector (Agilent Technologies, Avondale, PA, USA) with a 7683 Agilent autosampler and 2 5.0 The proposed low density miniaturized homogenous liquid–liquid solvent extraction was applied to the determination of trace amounts of pesticides in sediment samples, using the external calibration method. The curves, in the form of straight lines, were obtained by injecting extracts of the pesticides from 5.0 Low density miniaturized homogenous liquid–liquid solvent extraction is a simple, rapid, precise, reproducible, inexpensive, and green method for extraction of pesticides from soil/solid samples. The combination of LDMHLLE with GC/MS can be achieved very low limits of detection for determination of pesticides in sediment. The main advantage of the described methods compared with a traditional method is the significant reduction of time and the required volume of organic solvent.