In this study, the kinetics of nitric acid leaching of a spent NiO–Al2O3 catalyst was investigated. The effect of leaching parameters such as reaction time (30–120min), temperature (25–65°C), stirring speed (500–1300min−1) and average particle size (63–300μm) on Ni extraction were determined by statistical analysis. The results obtained show that extraction of about 85% was achieved under the following conditions: average particle size 75μm, temperature 65°C, reaction time 120min, stirring speed 600min−1, nitric acid concentration 50% and solid/liquid ratio 1:3. The kinetics study indicates that diffusion through the product layer is the rate-controlling process during the reaction. The activation energy for the different particle size using a stochastic model was determined. Activation energy values from 13.07–25kJ/mol are consistent with that reported for mixed or intermediate-controlled processes. The linear relationship observed between the activation energy Ea and the inverse of the initial particle diameter suggest that the dissolution rate controlling step may shift from product layer diffusion to intermediate-controlled process by decreasing particle size.Most industrial synthesis and processes require catalysis. Large quantities of catalysts are used in the fertilizer industry (i.e., ammonia plants), in petroleum refineries, in the chemicals sector, in various conversion processes, and in automotive catalytic converters for pollution control. Heterogeneous supported nickel catalysts are commonly used for various industrial processes such as: hydrogenation, hydrodesulphurisation, hydrorefining including fat hardening process (Ni, Mo/Al These catalysts deactivate over time, and when the activity of a catalyst declines below an acceptable level, the catalyst has to be regenerated and reused. However, when regeneration is not possible, the catalyst activity might decrease to very low levels, so that further regeneration might not be economically feasible. In such cases, spent catalysts tend to be discarded as solid wastes ( Recycling of spent catalysts has become an unavoidable task to reduce the catalyst waste and prevent the environmental pollution. A variety of processing approaches for recovering metal from the spent catalysts have been proposed. The spent catalysts are subjected to hydrometallurgical or hydro-pyrometallurgical treatment for the metal recovery. In both cases the metals are recovered as mixed solutions, and then separated by conventional separation techniques as solvent extraction, selective precipitation and ion-exchange ( Particularly, many acid leaching processes have been used to treat nickel spent catalysts. Sulphuric acid leaching process has been the most studied method for the recovery of nickel from a spent catalyst. On the other hand, In leaching studies with nitric acid, In this paper the effects of temperature, stirring speed, and particle size on the leaching rate of nickel spent catalyst using nitric acid have been examined. The experimental data are analyzed by statistical method. The shrinking core models (chemical control and diffusion control) and stochastic model are used to study the reaction kinetics. These kinetics models were used in different sections of the plots, according to time. Also, all the reaction time was considered in the kinetics models. The activation energies were used to evaluate the changes of reaction mechanism and determine the controlling step. The spent nickel catalyst samples used in this study were obtained from Mexican petrochemical industry. The spent catalyst samples were ground and sieved into different size fractions to obtain the following average particle sizes: 300, 150, 106, 75 and 63 The effect of the individual process parameter on the amount of nickel extracted is next examined using the statistical analysis of data (  These results are graphically showed in The The effect of reaction temperature on Ni extraction at different reaction times is plotted in Nickel oxide present in the spent catalyst reacts with nitric acid according to the following reaction equation (matrix α-alumina is not reacted with nitric acid) ( However, according to pH of solution, the Eq. It is according to the Pourbaix diagram ( Many author assume that acid leaching heterogeneous reaction kinetics for most of the metals in spent catalysts can be interpreted by using shrinking models [ According to later, the rate of reaction is given for shrinking core models (SCMs): the SCM controlled by chemical reaction and the SCM controlled by diffusion through the product layer ( When the regime is controlled by the diffusion of the reagents or dissolved species through the aqueous layer of reaction products, the fraction of Ni reacted at any time t can be predicted from Eq. However, other approximation is to use a stochastic model where the heterogeneity of solid spent catalyst by introduction of a stochastic distribution for the rate constant is taken into account ( According to The different apparent rate constants Apparent rate constants calculated from the slopes of the kinetics models at different temperatures were used to calculate the activation energy (Ea). As example, The estimated activation energies from the slope were as follows: considering the initial 30 Comparing these activation energy values with the value obtained by The calculated apparent rate constants obtained from stochastic model (Eq.  Dissolution kinetics of nickel from the spent catalyst was studied. From the results of these examinations the following conclusions can be drawn: A statistical analysis indicates that the dissolution rate was strongly influenced by the leaching temperature and particle size while the effect of stirring speed in the range studied was negligible. The extraction efficiency of about 85% of the NiO present in the spent catalyst was achieved under the following conditions: average particle size 75 Three kinetics models were compared: shrinking core model controlled by chemical reaction, shrinking core model controlled by diffusion through the product layer and a stochastic model. The leaching data were well fitted by stochastic model. The activation energies were calculated from stochastic model at the different particle size indicating values of 25, 22.06, 17.43, 14.23 and 13.07 A linear relationship between the activation energy The main conclusion is the methodology used to obtain and compare the apparent rates constants and the energy activation, using an sectioned analysis of the kinetics models at different reaction time periods. The methodology helps to understand the leaching reaction and permits to find the global controlling step for the NiO dissolution.