A response to the “discussion paper” by Mr A. K. Majumder for the paper: “Characterisation method for population of mineral particles for flow processes and the assessment of its application potential” by Ireneusz Pyka and Krzysztof Wierzchowski, published in International Journal of Mineral Processing 110–111 (2012) 126–134.Thank you for the interest in our paper and the remarks and feedback to its contents and formulated theses. Below please find the responses to the feedback provided in your “discussion paper”. First of all we do not understand the remark on page 1: There is no such claim in our paper. We only say that the information on the distribution of the particle settling velocity is not used during the analysis and modeling of the flow processes. We are not speaking about including the differences in particle settling velocity between the main components of the solid phase, nor of including the particle settling velocity in various models (equations). We want to use the results of the feed particle characteristics done according to the commonly recognized criterion for flow processes to analyze these processes. We have not encountered such information in literature. The particle settling velocity is a commonly recognized criterion for separation in flow processes including hydrocyclones, which has also been confirmed by the author of the “discussion paper”. The more so, we do not understand the “discussion paper” author's similar remark on page 2: Our paper focuses mainly on the method for characterizing the populations of the separated particles and the conclusions which follow from the analysis of the results of the characteristics of the polydispersive and polydensity feeds from the point of view of flow processes. We would like to stress that beside the technical conditions of the process and the characteristics of its execution, which we do not discuss much, the results of the separation, first of all, depend on the characterization of the feed for the process. This should be conducted according to the accepted separation criterion in the process, i.e. in case of the discussed flow processes, according to the differentiation of the settling velocity of the respective particle in the separation medium. The claim concerning the separation criterion is commonly accepted and has been supported in the paper by literature quotations No. 1–12. In the “discussion paper” the author quotes his own publication: In our paper, we do not go deep into the separation process itself nor into the tools for the process's modeling. The results of the feed characteristics are confronted with the results of tests conducted in industrial hydrocyclones. Thus, there is no need to quote the papers which concern modeling in the hydrocyclones and which are well known to the authors. It is very important for the authors to stress that no papers have been identified in which the models would be based on the feed characteristics in the function of particle settling velocity (distribution of particle settling velocity). In practice, despite the undisputed thesis that the particle settling velocity is the separation criterion in flow processes, different realizations of the flow processes are most often equated with classification (sizing) or cleaning (sorting) — a fact which also finds confirmation in the quoted literature. This causes a selection of adequate methods for characterizing the feed and the separation products — size analysis and float and sink test. It should maybe be stated here, that the lack of a method for assessing the distribution of particle settling velocity in feeds for flow processes, imposes its equation with classification (sizing), or with cleaning (sorting) and thus means accepting the particle population characterization methods typical for these processes. The ways in which this “shortcoming” is addressed has been identified by the authors in the existing literature and became one of the arguments for defining the direction of the works we have conducted ( The method for calculation of the particle settling velocity and the way for assigning the particle settling velocity according to the flow characteristics is, of course, known and thus in the paper review phase we have abandoned the phrase “new method” for particle characterization and used the term “method” for particle characterization. This we have done despite the fact that by saying “new” we did not mean the method for calculation of particle settling velocity but rather the whole procedure, where narrow, both size and density, fractions are assigned by the particle settling velocity (the particle settling velocity is calculated for them). Just as in the case of other methods, for characterization of particle populations for prognostic purposes, we determine the quality parameter (here: ash content) in the separated subset of particles. In the paper we have included the discussion of the faults and uncertainties of our method. On page 4 of the “discussion paper” the author writes: “to establish their hypotheses that a hydrocyclone is not a classifier but it separates particles based on the differences in their settling velocities, the authors had carried out experiments in a 100 And he continues: We have an indistinct impression that we have been misunderstood. We have conducted the experiments in typical devices which are used for flow processes. They are most often described as the classifying and thickening hydrocyclone (HC100 type) and the water only cyclone (HWO-300). Both are commonly used for separation of the “coal” feeds — for the so called “classification” of coal slurry and coal “cleaning” e.g.: We claim that in both devices the separation occurs according to the settling velocity which in itself is no novelty — see the discussions above. The novelty lies in our approach to the analysis and assessment of the separation process based on the results of the proposed methods for characterizing particle populations. The mentioned separation according to the settling velocity occurs at different (significantly) separation values of the settling velocity: classifying and thickening hydrocyclones – low separation velocities, WOC hydrocyclones – high separation velocities. The above is confirmed by the data in Figures 7 and 11 in our paper. Theoretical prognoses of the ash content in the separation products in HC 100 and HWO 300 are in accordance with the results of our experiments. The proposed method provides unambiguous information on the feed, when the separation process occurs using the difference in the particle settling velocity (hydrocyclones). While equating the separation in WOC with preparation in order to fully explain the separation process additional analyses (beside density) ( The conducted experiments have shown, that the proposed method for characterizing the particle populations allows a more adequate prognosis of the results of separation in hydrocyclone (Figures 7 and 11) than the methods based on the assessment of the particle distribution in feed in function of their size or density (Figures 4 and 5). Figures 8 and 10 picture the change in the ash content in the separation products in the function of particle settling velocity in both experiments. The tendencies in their changes are similar to the results of separation in hydrocyclones of various designs ( On page 4 the author of the “discussion paper” writes: The remark above is not very clear to us, but we think that what the author means is the fact that in the size and density fractions which we have separated there may be particles of similar density but different ash contents. But just the same criticism can be applied to the sink and float test and even the size analysis. The value of the quality parameter (for example ash) is average for the separated subset (size fraction, density fraction) separated from the solid phase of feed (cleaning, screening). This does not, however, in any way impede an everyday use of such data for technological analyses, nor making prognoses of the results of the separation. On page 5 the author of the “discussion paper” claims: Our observations show that a “badly” set up WOC in which the “classification effect” takes place, can work in such a way that the discharge (concentrate) contains no particles of the largest size including no large “pure” coal particles (of the least density). In our opinion, such a strong “classification effect” definitely proves that WOC is no typical gravity washer. The causes of this effect are explained by the data in the It can be clearly observed that an ordering of the size and density fraction according to the decreasing settling velocity outlines a characteristic distribution of the ash content in size and density fractions in the function of settling velocity. This is nothing else but an illustration of the impact of the free settling ratio effect on the results of separation in flow processes. Assuming (theoretically) a separation velocity for the process, for example at the level of 0.119268