The synergistic solvent extraction of Pr(III) from chloride solutions has been studied using a mixture of Cyanex 301 and LIX 63. Among the various mixtures of extractants screened, this mixture showed significant synergism at a Cyanex 301 mole fraction of 0.8. The effect of various parameters such as equilibrium pH, extractant concentration was studied to identify the extraction reaction on the basis of slope analysis. From stripping studies, dilute sulfuric acid was found to be the best stripping agent. Based on separation factors, the mixture may be applied for the binary separations of Pr and Nd from La.Solvent extraction is a versatile method used in hydrometallurgy and applied for the separation of metals ranging from laboratory scale to large scale operations. Separation of rare earth elements with single extractant needs many numbers of stages due to low separation factors Jia et al. studied the extraction behavior of mixture of 1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoyl-pyrazolone-5 (HPMBP) and triisobutylphosphine sulfide (B) towards La(III) from chloride solutions and reported the composition of extracted species in the organic phase as LaCl Literature survey indicates that few studies are dealing with the mixture systems comprising Cyanex 301 for the extraction of rare earths and most of the studies are devoted to mixture of Cyanex 301 with acidic and neutral extractants ( Bis (2,4,4- trimethylpentyl) dithiophosphinic acid (Cyanex 301, Cytec, Canada), 5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxydodecan-6-one oxime, (LIX 63, Cognis, USA) were used as such without further purification. Trioctylamine (TOA), Alamine 308 (Triisooctylamine) and Alamine 336 (mixture of tri octyl/decyl amine) were purchased from BASF, Germany. Kerosene (Chemically pure grade) was purchased from Dae Jung Chemicals, Korea and used as a diluent. The stock solutions of rare earth elements(III) were prepared by dissolving appropriate amount of rare earth chlorides (Alfa-Aesar) in deionized water. The pH of the aqueous phase was adjusted using HCl/NaOH solutions. All other chemicals used in this work were of reagent grade. A wrist action shaker (Burrel, USA) was used for conducting solvent extraction experiments in which equal volume (20 The extraction of Pr(III) from chloride solutions containing 1.06  The effect of aqueous phase acidity on the extraction of Pr(III) using 0.08 The dependency on the concentration of Cyanex 301 and LIX 63 in the synergistic extraction reaction of Pr(III) can be determined by varying the concentration of one extractant in the mixture at fixed concentration of the other extractant. In order to recover the metal from loaded organic, stripping studies are crucial in solvent extraction experiments. Different stripping agents like HCl, HNO Mutual separation of light rare earths is a challenging task in solvent extraction due to their similarities in chemical properties Solvent extraction experiments have been performed to investigate synergistic system for the extraction of Pr(III) from chloride solution. From screening experiments, the mixture of Cyanex 301 and LIX 63 was found to show synergistic effect on the extraction of Pr. The maximum value of synergistic enhancement factor (2.26) was obtained at Cyanex 301 mole fraction of 0.8. By applying slope analysis method to the extraction data, the synergistic solvent extraction reaction was identified and extracted complex was proposed as PrH The authors express their sincere thanks for the financial support by the