The purpose of the present study was to determine the relationships between atherosclerotic calcified plaque (CP) and bone mineral density (BMD) in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM2). CP in the coronary arteries, carotid bifurcation, and abdominal aorta was measured using computed tomography (CT) in 1023 diabetic subjects from 453 families. Trabecular volumetric BMD in thoracic (T-vBMD) and lumbar (L-vBMD) spine was measured with quantitative CT (QCT), while areal BMD (aBMD) in the lumbar spine and hip was measured by dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA). Correlation coefficients were computed to assess the magnitude of associations and generalized estimating equations (GEE1) were used to make statistical inferences while accounting for familial correlation. Subjects were 53.8% female, 85% European American (EA) and 15% African American (AA). After adjustment for age, significant inverse associations between CP and vBMD persisted in EA men (correlations between −0.11 and −0.16, all p
                     <0.05 with the exception of carotid CP vs. T-vBMD, p
                     =0.076) and in AA women, excluding aortic CP (correlations between −0.16 and −0.25, all p
                     <0.05). Estrogen use in AA but not EA women was consistently associated with an inverse relation between CP and vBMD. Significant inverse relationships between CP and vBMD were observed in EA men and AA women with DM2 after adjusting for age and other covariates. QCT determined vBMD was more strongly related to CP than aBMD by DXA. The relation between CP and BMD in diabetes is influenced by age, sex, and ethnicity, with further effect modification by hormone replacement therapy.In 1964, Anderson, Barnett and Nordin first suggested that aortic calcification and low bone mineral content were related disorders Longitudinal studies also demonstrate relationships between bone mass and aortic calcified plaque. Twenty-five-year follow-up data from the Framingham Heart study demonstrated that in women, but not men, the percentage decline in cortical bone in the second metacarpal was significantly associated with the increase in aortic calcified plaque assessed from a lateral lumbar radiograph Diabetes may influence the relationships between CP and BMD. Prior studies have shown that older diabetic subjects have higher dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA)-measured bone mass than non-diabetic subjects. Despite this observation, the fracture risk in diabetic subjects was 1.64 times higher after adjustment for hip BMD and other fracture risk factors In the present study, we evaluated whether the inverse relationship often observed between CP and BMD is also present in subjects with DM2, specifically with respect to BMD in various skeletal compartments (e.g. vertebral trabecular bone, areal measures of BMD in the hip and spine) in diabetic DHS participants. The DHS recruited a bi-racial cohort of families containing ≥ The examination included interviews for medical history, current medications and health behaviors. We did not adjust CP for use of anti-resorptive agents (i.e., bisphosphonates, calcitonin, selective estrogen receptor modulators) since fewer than 2% of DHS participants took these agents. We also did not adjust for glucocorticoid usage, taken by 6% of DHS participants, since they did not impact BMD in these analyses (data not shown). Measurements of body size, resting blood pressure, 12-lead electrocardiogram, fasting blood draw and urine collection were conducted in the General Clinical Research Center. History of CVD was provided by participant self-report. We excluded subjects with elevated serum creatinine concentrations (≥ Calcified atherosclerotic plaque was measured in the coronary arteries using single and multidetector CT systems incorporating a standardized protocol based on those currently implemented in the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute's (NHLBI) Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) studies CT exams in these vascular beds were analyzed by experienced analysts producing measures of calcified plaque the Agatston score corrected for slice thickness on a GE Advantage Windows Workstation using the SmartScores software package (General Electric Medical Systems, Waukesha, WI). The reproducibility of coronary and carotid calcified plaque scores obtained from the duplicate scans and inter- and intra-observer variability was > DXA scans of posterior–anterior spine and proximal femur obtained using a fan-beam scanner (Delphi A, Hologic, Waltham, MA, USA) to determine BMD The sample means, standard deviations and medians were computed for the continuous characteristics, BMD and CP. The proportions were calculated for the discrete demographic characteristics. To compare the study population's characteristics between ethnicity and sex groups, the generalized estimating equation (GEE1) procedure The characteristics of the sex- and ethnicity-stratified study population are presented in Systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, hemoglobin A1c, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol and spine vBMD were all higher in AAs compared to EAs, despite similar durations of DM2 and anti-hypertensive medication treatment ( Calcified atherosclerotic plaque, reported as the total calcium score using Agatston Units, averaged 705 for the coronary arteries, 111 for the carotid bifurcations, and 3765 for the infra-renal abdominal aorta. When stratified by ethnicity and sex, EA men had a significantly higher burden of CP in all three vascular territories, EA women had the second highest burden of CP (after EA men) in the carotid bifurcation and abdominal aorta, while AA men had the second highest burden of coronary CP ( BMD measured by DXA and QCT demonstrated significant differences by race and sex and no significant race Correlations between CP in the coronary, carotid and abdominal aorta territories and BMD using QCT (thoracic and lumbar spine) and DXA (hip and spine) are presented in In EA men, an inverse association was present between the vascular sites (coronary, carotid and abdominal aorta) and the two sites of vBMD (thoracic and lumbar) before and after age adjustment (model 1 with 6 of 6 associations demonstrating inverse correlations with DXA-derived aBMD measures were less well correlated with CP. Significant relationships between aBMD and CP were observed in AA women and EA men. In AA women, the inverse associations between spine aBMD and coronary artery CP were present in the unadjusted and age-adjusted models, but not in the fully adjusted model. In EA men, unadjusted and age-adjusted associations between spine aBMD and coronary CP were positive, but again not present in the fully adjusted model. In EA women, hip aBMD was negatively associated with coronary, carotid, and aortic CP only in the unadjusted model. In AA men, DXA aBMD of the hip is inversely associated with coronary CP prior to age adjustment and with abdominal aortic CP only in model 3, observations based on a smaller number of individuals. Stratified analyses were performed in post-menopausal women based upon estrogen use, since this factor is known to influence BMD and atherogenesis ( Type 2 diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis and CVD are major causes of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Calcified plaque and bone mineralization can be precisely quantified, and their relationships analyzed non-invasively, to provide insight for disease prevention and therapy. This analysis is the first to define the relationship between BMD and CP using extensive phenotyping of both traits in a large high risk population that included men and subjects with DM2. A particular strength of this report was our ability to measure BMD using two complimentary approaches. DXA measurement of aBMD is the de facto standard for determining BMD in both clinical practice and the research setting. QCT provides a measurement of vBMD specific for the metabolically active trabecular bone in the vertebrae. Our findings indicate that the relationship between calcified atherosclerotic plaque and bone mineralization in diabetic individuals is complex and influenced by a variety of factors. In addition, vertebral trabecular bone measured by QCT (vBMD) but not the more commonly measured and reported combined cortical and trabecular bone of the spine or hip (aBMD measured by DXA) demonstrated significant associations with CP at multiple vascular sites. The strongest and most consistent inverse associations between vBMD and CP were observed in diabetic EA men. EA men had the highest calcified atherosclerotic plaque burden at all three vascular sites and the lowest vertebral trabecular vBMD of all sex–ethnic groups (all contrasts highly significant – see Atherosclerosis was assessed by measuring CP at three important vascular territories directly associated with the clinical expression of CVD: the carotid bifurcation, abdominal aorta and coronary arteries. Coronary artery CP measured by cardiac CT has been demonstrated to add significantly to traditional risk factors in the prediction of near-term coronary artery disease events, CVD events and all-cause mortality in adults. We detected significant negative associations between CP in the coronary, carotid and aortic territories with vBMD in EA men and AA women. Associations between CP in these vascular beds and CVD risk factors have been demonstrated Our results show the relations between sub-clinical atherosclerosis and BMD vary by an individual's ethnicity and sex. Significant ethnicity and sex differences in coronary CP have previously been reported in the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) population. In the MESA study population, recruited at 6 sites across North America and selected based upon the absence of clinical CVD, the relative risk of an AA having coronary calcification was 0.78 compared to EA participants Evidence for a systematic and possibly genetic process controlling the process of calcification in arteries and bone is supported by the marked ethnic variation in the prevalence of osteoporosis The Study of Osteoporotic Fractures demonstrated that BMD using DXA in the heel, femoral neck and forearm was higher in older diabetic women (mean age 72 years), compared to non-diabetic women We have previously demonstrated the independent heritability of BMD and calcified atherosclerotic plaque There are several limitations in the interpretation of our results. First, the DHS is a genetic study, by design based on a family sampling strategy. To prevent overstating statistical significance, we present only a conservative definition of significance to account for the inherent correlation that is present within family members. Second, the observations are limited to individuals with DM2. It is possible and perhaps even likely that the observed relations in diabetics would be different in non-diabetic subjects. The complexity of the relations between bone mineralization and calcified atherosclerotic plaque, as well as the ethnic-specific and sex-specific findings, support the contention that genetic causes likely impact the relations between bone and atherosclerotic calcified plaque. Replication of our results in a large non-diabetic population would be informative as to whether these relations are specific to diabetes. Furthermore, evaluating the relations between CP and BMD in non-diabetic populations will likely provide greater insight to the biologic pathways involved and whether they are unique to diabetes. Third, although we report the largest study evaluating the relation of BMD to CP in AA and EA men and women to date, our inferences related to AA men and the stratified analyses on the effects of estrogen in women are limited by relatively small sample sizes but document the importance of including minorities and both sexes in clinical studies in this area of science. In summary, our results indicate that a complex but significant relation is present between atherosclerotic calcification and bone mineralization in type 2 diabetics. The observation of this relation in humans supports the hypothesis that metabolic, cellular and/or genetic processes related to both atherosclerosis and bone metabolism play a role in osteoporosis and atherosclerosis. Furthermore, we have shown the relation between vascular calcification and bone density is strongly influenced by age, sex and ethnicity, with further effect modification in women receiving supplemental estrogen. EA men and AA women with diabetes have a significant inverse associations between vertebral trabecular bone and CP at multiple vascular sites, effects that remained significant after adjustment for age and other covariates. Thus, inverse relationships between bone and vascular calcification exist in a population of overweight and obese diabetic subjects at high risk for atherosclerotic vascular diseases. Subjects with obesity and diabetes are often advised to lose weight, and weight loss is usually paralleled by loss of bone. The existence of an independent inverse relationship between the skeletal and vascular calcium fluxes could lead to increased vascular calcification. It would be interesting, but technically challenging, to assess whether the calcium released from bone is preferentially relocated to the arterial wall over other calcium pools. Such an effect might occur if released skeletal calcium circulates in a mineral form or complexed with phospholipids or peptides which might be more readily incorporated into the vascular mineralization process. Whether these events occur or lead to increases or decreases in clinical events is a largely unexplored area worthy of investigation. These results support the performance of additional studies designed to better understand interactions between bone mineralization and atherosclerotic calcified plaque, as well as the influences of genes and hormone replacement therapy on this interaction. Software and technical support was provided by Image Analysis; Columbia, KY and General Electric Healthcare; Waukesha, WI. The investigators acknowledge the cooperation of our participants; study recruiters Ms. Carrie Smith and Ms. Sue Ann Backus; CT analysts Lining Du, Caresse Hightower and Susan Pillsbury; technical support Chris O'Rourke, Bob Ellison, Josh Tan and Cynthia Hogan; and CT technologists. This study was supported by NIAMS and NHLBI grants R01 AR048797 (JJC) and R01 HL67348 (DWB) and the General Clinical Research Center of the Wake Forest University School of Medicine grant M01 RR07122. The authors report no conflicts of interest.