Gold producers are currently being forced to cut costs, to increase plant throughput or to selectively mine out higher-grade areas. Another approach is to produce a value-added product, such as 99.99% gold, currently being produced at some minesites via a chloride re-leach route. There may be an opportunity for the refining of gold directly from cyanide liquors such as eluates and intensive leachates of gravity concentrates. While previous work with solvent extractants has focused on the recovery of gold from leach liquors as a replacement for carbon-in-pulp processing, the present work presents an alternative idea, the notion of on-site refining of gold with no re-leaching step.
                  The current work indicates that it is possible to produce gold of 99.99% purity or higher by direct SX from a cyanide eluate type solution containing high copper tenors (about 200 mg/l Au, 140 mg/l Cu and 2 mg/l Ag). Excellent selectivity can be achieved in the extraction stage for gold over copper and silver. The small amount of co-extracted silver and copper can easily be scrubbed from the gold-loaded organic phase, which is subsequently easily stripped. The gold may then be recovered by electrowinning or reduction.
                  Other work on a mixed-metal intensive cyanide leachate type solution (700 ppm Au, 400 ppm Ag, 200 ppm Cu, 150 ppm Ni, Fe, and Zn) has shown that the process is very selective against base metals such as Ni, Co, Fe and Zn, and that loadings as high as 5000 mg/l gold can be obtained on the organic.
                  This process may well be suited to gold plants at remote sites, or where high copper or silver levels are present. There are several possible advantages over both electrowinning/smelting or chloride re-leach/SX routes, including costs, occupational health and safety (OH&S) and recovery of by-products.The current gold price together with corporate demands is bringing great pressure to bear on gold producers to cut costs, increase tons processed or to selectively mine out higher-grade areas. One other approach is to produce a value-added product, such as 99.99% gold. The premium payable on 24 carat gold is significant, and there is a growing demand for gold jewellery. Recent application of chloride re-leach and solvent extraction (SX) to gold refining ( Previous work has shown that a variety of organic extractants can be used for the selective extraction of gold from solution, including tri- Two solutions were made up to simulate potential applications for the concept, viz., a mixed-metal leachate that could be expected from intensive cyanidation of a gravity concentrate or other material, and a cyanide eluate type solution containing high copper tenors. The compositions are given in The effect of TBP concentration in two diluents on the extraction of metals from the mixed-metal leachate solution is shown in The effect of diluent aromatic content on selectivity is negligible. Loadings of up to about 6 g/l gold can be achieved in 100% TBP. An equivalent isotherm for 80% TBP showed a reduced capacity, of ∼4.5 g/l. TBP was loaded from the mixed-metal leachate solution under conditions similar to those demonstrating crowding effects. The loadings of gold and silver were 2960 mg/l Au and 149 mg/l Ag, while Cu, Ni, Fe and Ni were all less than 0.05 mg/l on the organic. This loaded organic was subjected to batch scrubbing with a series of scrub solutions at two different temperatures. Scrub reagents were chosen to include anions known to form silver complexes with high charge density, such as Ag(S  TBP was loaded from the high-copper eluate solution under conditions similar to those demonstrating crowding effects. The loadings of gold and silver from the high-copper eluate solution were 3575 mg/l Au, 0.02 mg/l Ag and 0.01 mg/l Cu. This loaded organic was subjected to batch scrubbing with 10% NaCN at ambient temperature, and the results are shown in While analysis of metals in organic at such low levels is close to the detection limit, aqueous assays proved to be useful in calculating scrubbing efficiencies. In this case, while scrubbing was not necessary, the results are useful in showing trends as well as anticipated gold losses to scrub liquor under these conditions. TBP was loaded from the mixed-metal leachate solution under conditions similar to those demonstrating crowding effects. This loaded organic was subjected to batch stripping with a series of strip solutions and conditions. The results are shown in Water stripping at elevated temperatures would likely be the most appropriate system. The use of sulfides shows some promise, with stripping due to the conversion of the Au(CN) A stripping isotherm was generated by contacting the loaded TBP with de-ionised water at 90 °C at different phase ratios, and is shown in This process may well be suited to gold plants at remote sites, where there may be logistical issues regarding refining; in other cases, relatively high bullion taxes may be imposed by local government refineries. Where high copper or silver levels are present, zinc cementation is often considered as the preferred process option, owing to low gold loadings and possible problems in electrowinning and smelting. The latter restrictions may be overcome by implementing the solvent extraction route, possibly enabling the installation of a modern carbon-in-pulp plant in these cases. Relatively high penalties may also be imposed for refining gold with impurity metals in some cases. A possible flowsheet schematic is illustrated in There are a number of possible advantages of this cyanide-based route over chloride re-leach routes. These include the elimination of a re-leach step from the flowsheet, resulting in the potential lowering of both capital and operating costs. There would be no requirement for concentrated HCl and chlorine gas, with both OH&S and materials of construction issues. The smelting step would be eliminated. Silver recovery would potentially be simplified, being already present in a relatively clean solution. The current work indicates that it may be possible to produce gold of 99.99% purity or higher by direct SX from cyanide liquors containing base metal and silver ions. Work on a mixed-metal intensive cyanide leachate type solution (700 ppm Au, 400 ppm Ag, 200 ppm Cu, 150 ppm Ni, Fe, and Zn) has shown that the process can be very selective against base metals such as Ni, Co, Fe and Zn, and that loadings as high as 5000 mg/l gold can be obtained on the organic. With an eluate type solution containing high copper tenors (about 200 mg/l Au, 140 mg/l Cu and 2 mg/l Ag), excellent selectivity was again achieved in the extraction stage for gold over copper and silver. Other phosphine oxides, such as Cyanex 921 or 923 ( The small amount of co-extracted silver and copper can easily be scrubbed from the gold-loaded organic phase, which is subsequently comparatively easily stripped. The gold could then be recovered, potentially at 99.99% purity, using methods such as reduction or electrowinning. This process may well be suited to gold plants at remote sites, or where high copper or silver levels are present. There are several possible advantages over both electrowinning/smelting or chloride re-leach/SX routes, including costs, OH&S and recovery of by-products. The author wishes to acknowledge the excellent technical assistance of Loc Le and the permission of Lakefield Oretest to publish this work.