Extra-articular fractures of the distal tibial metaphysis, metadiaphyseal junction and adjacent diaphysis are distinct in their management from impaction derived “pilon”-type fractures and mid-diaphyseal fractures. The optimum management of these metadiaphyseal fractures is controversial, with advocates for intramedullary nail, plate and external fixation. The evolution of treatment options for these fractures has been closely linked to developments in implant technology and surgical technique. Further developments in this area, particularly with respect to minimally invasive plating techniques and nail design are ongoing. The literature suggests that both intramedullary nail fixation and minimally invasive plating are appropriate management options for these fractures, but further studies are required to determine the superiority of one technique over the other.Fractures of the distal tibial metaphysis, diaphysis and adjacent diaphysis are a common consequence of road traffic accidents or footballing injuries. These metadiaphyseal fractures are distinct in terms of their management from articular impaction “pilon” type fractures and middle third diaphyseal injuries. The tibia is an important weight bearing bone in the lower limb, articulating with the femur proximally at the knee and distally with the talus at the ankle. It also has articulations proximally and distally with the fibula which lies posterolaterally. The fibula is also attached to the tibia along its length by the interosseous membrane. The tibia has proximal and distal metaphyses and a diaphysis spanning between them. The tibial diaphysis has three surfaces, the posterior and lateral surfaces serving principally for muscular attachment. The medial surface is mainly subcutaneous, consequently tibial fractures can easily perforate the skin and become open injuries. The medial surface extends beyond the tibial plafond to form the medial malleolus of the ankle. As the diaphysis gives way to the distal metaphysis, the triangular cross-section becomes more circular, this means that intramedullary devices only develop an interference fit in the central few centimetres. The distal tibial blood supply is derived from two sources. The outer third of the cortex receives nutrition from a network of periosteal vessels, principally on the medial surface, which are branches of the anterior and posterior tibial arteries. Distal tibial fractures are often associated with high-energy injuries and classification of the state of the soft tissues is useful for communication, research and prognosis. The state of the soft tissues can be assessed by means of the Gustilo–Anderson ( In clinical practice, the classification of the morphology of distal tibial fractures is descriptive, stating the position, orientation of the fracture, degree of translation, angulation, shortening and rotation as well as the extent of comminution. Robinson et al. Distal tibial fractures may also be classified according to the AO/ASIF system ( Distal tibial metadiaphyseal fractures are frequently a consequence of high-energy trauma and should be managed according to Advanced Trauma Life Support principles in the first instance. Assessment of the neurovascular status of the limb is mandatory, in the event of vascular compromise immediate fracture reduction should be attempted. A careful inspection of the soft tissues is important, particularly seeking evidence of an open fracture. Open fractures require the prompt administration of antibiotics and urgent washout and debridement should be performed. The risk of compartment syndrome should also be considered and urgent four compartment fasciotomy undertaken if suspected. However the risk of compartment syndrome has been reported as being less frequent than in mid-diaphyseal fractures. To our knowledge, specific studies have not been conducted to determine the consequences of delay on the debridement and fixation of open distal metadiaphyseal fractures. However, determining the optimal timing of treatment and the consequences of any possible delays in the management of lower limb open fractures has been of interest to surgeons for many years. Traditionally, 6 Evidence from pilon fractures with severe soft-tissue injuries has suggested that early definitive fixation is detrimental. Non-operative management of distal tibial metadiaphyseal fractures through cast bracing is a potentially attractive option, avoiding the risks of surgery and surgical post-operative complications. Two case series have been published reviewing the outcomes of distal tibial fractures. Sarmiento and Latta The series from Bostman et al. For carefully selected patients with relatively stable fractures, who are committed to close monitoring, non-operative treatment may be an option. However, given the scarcity of published reports on non-operative management, the potentially high rates of early displacement and significant rates of malunion, non-operative management cannot currently be recommended over operative management for most patients. The concept of intramedullary nailing of tibial fractures derives from the work of Kuntscher in the 1940s. Intramedullary nailing is widely accepted as the operative treatment of choice for most open and closed diaphyseal tibial fractures. Achieving and maintaining a good reduction is the most difficult aspect of nailing distal tibial metadiaphyseal fractures. In mid-diaphyseal fractures, insertion of the intramedullary nail aids fracture reduction as the nail has a diameter only slightly smaller than the cavity in which it sits, ensuring coronal and sagittal alignment. In distal metadiaphyseal fractures, the flare of the metaphysis, allows a “windscreen wiper” action of the distal fragment. Initial reduction of the fracture may often be achieved with gentle manipulation and traction by an assistant, with or without the use of percutaneously placed pointed reduction forceps. Gravitational reduction, for example flexing the knee over a support such as stacked towels or a radiolucent foam wedge, may also be sufficient to maintain a satisfactory reduction. For patients in whom additional distraction is required, traction may be applied through a calcaneal pin. Alternatively a femoral distracter or intra-operative external fixator have been described as alternative devices to maintain length and alignment without the need for formal traction apparatus. Ensuring that the nail is centred within the distal fragment is important. The use of a straight guidewire can be helpful. If the wire is kept perpendicular to the joint line during reaming then there will be minimal deformity in the coronal plane, although shortening, recurvatum and rotational deformity must still be considered. The evidence for the use of reamed or unreamed nails in distal tibial fractures is less clear than in diaphyseal fractures. Reaming confers the potential benefit of increasing the diameter of nail and reducing the risk of nail or locking screw failure. In distal tibial fractures, the role of distal locking is not just to control length and rotation, but also stability in the coronal and sagittal planes. Most surgeons aim for two or more locking screws within the distal fragment. In the past this has meant manually shortening nails within the operating theatre to ensure that two screw holes were available within the short distal fracture fragment. Modern nail designs have more distal locking options within the distal 15 Fractures of the distal fibula are commonly associated with distal tibial fractures. In tibial shaft fractures there is some evidence to suggest that an intact fibula can predispose to delayed or non-union, as evidenced by the beneficial effects on union of fibulotomy or partial fibulectomy. Routine dynamisation of nails for distal tibial fractures, using a single proximal screw in dynamic mode and two distal locking screws, should be discouraged due to the unacceptable degrees of shortening according to some reports. In a systematic review incorporating 489 distal tibial fractures treated with intramedullary nailing, Zelle et al. Open reduction and internal fixation of distal tibial fractures initially appears to offer significant benefits over intramedullary nailing. It allows near anatomic reduction with stable fixation preventing malunion and there are no restrictions on the length of distal fragment as may be imposed by the need for distal locking of intramedullary nails. The application of AO principles to tibial fractures should have good results as evidenced by the case series of 142 tibial fractures by Batten et al., Alternative approaches to the distal tibia via a posterolateral or anterolateral approach have been proposed to improve the soft-tissue cover of plates, MIPO is undertaken following initial resuscitation and after the resolution of significant soft-tissue swelling that would prevent wound closure; this may require a period of temporary immobilisation in a backslab or external fixator. The protocol for MIPO requires initial closed reduction of the fracture. This may be achieved directly with percutaneously positioned pointed reduction forceps or indirectly through manual traction, an AO femoral distractor, concurrent fibular fracture fixation or a spanning external fixator. Plates that have been used for MIPO include dynamic compression plates (DCP), limited contact dynamic compression plates (LC-DCP) and more recently the anatomically contoured locking compression plates (LCP). The LCP is preferable as the locked fixed angle construct means the plate can sit off the bone, preserving periosteal blood supply. Anatomical contouring reduces the prominence of the plate, helps restore the normal anatomy and reduces varus/valgus or rotational deformity. There have recently been a large number of case series reporting outcomes of MIPO in distal tibial fractures (see Infection rates are also generally reported as being low, with Krackhardt et al. Reports of functional outcomes from plate fixation vary within the literature. Bahari et al. External fixation may be used either for temporary stabilisation or for definitive fixation. Temporary fixation with a unilateral or “delta” frame spanning the ankle joint is advocated by some as the initial management of distal tibial fractures, particularly in high-energy injuries. Relatively few studies have looked specifically at the use of external fixators as definitive treatment for non-pilon type distal tibial fractures. A series by Demiralp et al. Whichever management option is selected whether operative or non-operative, complications may occur. Intramedullary nailing of a tibial fracture at any level has been associated with complications such as an increased risk of compartment syndrome, Evidence from the management of pilon fractures by open reduction and internal fixation using plates has shown significant rates of infection. The main complications associated with external fixation are ankle stiffness, pin site infection and loosening. When external fixation is used for temporary stabilisation of tibial shaft fractures, there is an increased risk of subsequent infection of any intramedullary nail used for definitive fixation. Non-operative management avoids many of the problems associated with surgical treatment, particularly infection and implant related complications. There is a significant of risk of shortening with the non-operative management of axially unstable fractures. The successful management of metadiaphyseal fractures requires planning and technical skill whichever method is chosen. The ultimate choice of technique will depend on multiple factors including fracture configuration, proximity to the plafond, bone quality, soft-tissue injury and available equipment. Non-operative management requires considerable skill and vigilance, but may be appropriate in some patients, particularly those with contraindications to anaesthesia. External fixation offers benefits in terms of soft-tissue management and in the management of severely comminuted fractures, but questions remain over the risks of infection and non-union. Intramedullary nailing may be effective in managing these fractures even with simple articular extension, but care needs to be taken with reduction and adequate distal locking to prevent malalignment and chronic knee pain may also be an issue. MIPO appears to offer good results in terms of alignment and union, with low infection rates compared to open reduction and internal fixation. Lower profile plates may help to reduce the incidence of problems due to prominent metalwork. Further research is required in a number of areas including determination of the role of fibular fixation in intramedullary nailing of distal tibial fractures. There is also need for a good quality study comparing intramedullary nailing with MIPO. Finally, large scale trials assessing functional outcomes and patient satisfaction, rather than purely radiographic outcomes from the various treatment modalities would also be beneficial. There were/are no financial or personal relationship with other people or organisations that can inappropriately influence the authors work.