Mineral particle size plays a significant role on the flotation process. The flotation performance (grade and recovery) of apatite particles in a complex carbonatite ore from Brazil was investigated in a flotation column as a function of particle size and reagent concentrations. Flotation feed samples were also mineralogically and chemically characterized. For the bench scale flotation experiments, the sample was fractioned into different size intervals. The experiments were conducted according to a factorial experimental design. The experimental data were analyzed using P2O5 grade/recovery curves, response surface methodology and canonical analysis. An optimum particle size was found under the experimental conditions studied. The P2O5 grade and recovery rates obtained with a particle size between 37μm and 105μm were simultaneously higher than those required industrially.Fertilizers are increasingly important to improve crop yields needed to feed a growing world population. They are natural and manufactured chemicals containing nutrients, such as phosphorus, which are known to improve soil fertility. Phosphorus is an essential element for plant and animal nutrition and has no substitutes in agriculture. Phosphate rock is the only economical source of phosphorus for manufacturing phosphatic fertilizers and chemicals The composition of phosphate rocks varies from one deposit to another. Therefore, phosphate rocks from different sources may be expected to behave differently in beneficiation and acidulation processes. Phosphate rocks are primarily composed of the apatite group in association with a wide assortment of accessory minerals, mainly fluorides, carbonates, clays, quartz, silicates, and metal oxides Froth flotation is widely used in mineral processing technologies to separate finely ground valuable minerals from a mixture with gangue minerals initially present in a pulp. The technique involves the contact of air bubbles with the solids The flotation process is complex and there are many subprocesses and interactions that make it difficult to interpret the mechanisms and also to properly assess such factors as variables, etc. Reagents are added to perform specific roles to manipulate the pulp chemistry and enhance the differences in mineral surface hydrophobicity to facilitate the separation. The reality is not so straightforward and, in addition to the primary role of a reagent, there are various reagent interactions and competing effects Among the various types of flotation equipment, the flotation column has proved to be the most suitable equipment for processing low-grade ores, presenting a high degree of liberation only in a range of fine sizes. Yekeler and Sönmez Several factors can influence the floatability of apatite, such as its composition, particle size, the reagents used in the flotation process and the gangue minerals. Among the gangue minerals, one of the main problems is the carbonates occurring either as small inclusions or veinlets within apatite or as free grains. The presence of carbonates (dolomite, calcite) may cause problems in apatite concentration by froth flotation due to the poor selectivity of the apatite in relation to these gangue minerals when saponified vegetable oils are used as the collector. In mineral processing, size reduction by mechanical crushing and grinding is substantial to decrease the size and consequently to liberate the valuable minerals from its gangue for market requirements The size of mineral particles plays a significant role in the sequence of events that lead to the flotation of a particle The aim of this paper is to investigate the effects of particle size and reagent concentrations on grade and recovery in column flotation of apatite from a Brazilian phosphate ore in order to gain a better understanding of the behavior of different particle sizes in flotation performance. The phosphate ore sample used in this study was provided by Bunge Brasil SA, a company of the Barreiro carbonatite complex located in Araxá, state of Minas Gerais, in mid-southern Brazil. The host rocks consist mainly of carbonatites and glimmerites The sample was collected in the industrial circuit where it was crushed, ground and classified. For the bench scale flotation experiments, the sample was fractioned into different size intervals. The size fractions prepared by wet sieving were 297–210 Mineralogical composition and apatite characteristics are fundamental to understand the behavior of ore during the froth flotation process, and can contribute to obtain an apatite concentrate with better grade and recovery An X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out to qualitatively identify the main mineralogical phases present in the flotation feed samples, using a semiautomatic Rigaku Geigerflex diffractometer with curved graphite-crystal monochromator, operating at 40 Polished thin sections of each size fraction were examined under a Leitz Ortoplan optical microscope to study the mineral composition. Microstructural studies were also carried out using a scanning electron microscope equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (SEM/EDS). Detailed mineralogical information was obtained through these techniques. The SEM/EDS analyses were done with a SEM JEOL model JSM-5410 microscope and an EDS Noran model TN-M3055 spectrometer. Backscattered images were obtained using the former. The latter provided semi-quantitative microchemical analyses (spot analyses that allow for the identification of minute mineral phases in a specified area or in a point probing) of discrete areas on a polished sample. These two techniques are used independently, although the same sample is often analyzed by both techniques to provide complementary information. SEM/EDS can accurately determine elemental compositions and thus mineral species using internationally recognized standards. Chemical composition of these samples was analyzed by the X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) technique using a Philips spectrometer. The global composition of each total sample was determined by a combination of three techniques: particle counting using optical microscopy, chemical analysis and X-ray diffraction. A Malvern Mastersizer Microplus (MAF 5001) laser diffractometer was used to determine the particle size distribution by laser diffraction. The Sauter mean diameter for each size fraction was also obtained using this technique. The flotation experiments were accomplished with fatty acid soap from soybean oil as collector. The gangue depressant used was gelatinized cornstarch. Both collector and depressant were diluted in water from the industrial process to a concentration of 2.5% for the collector and 3% for the depressant. The pH was controlled with 10% NaOH. The flotation tests were carried out in an acrylic batch flotation column 1.48 In batch operation, the equipment works with a circulating load (0.50 In the apatite concentrates, the quality of the floated product and the flotation process productivity were evaluated based, respectively, on the content and recovery of P The chemical composition of the flotation products was determined by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry using a Philips spectrometer. The recovery of P Tests were carried out by using a factorial experimental design First, to obtain an initial view of the behavior of apatite flotation in different particle size ranges, two size fractions were investigated in the experiments, one of a coarse particle size (−65 In the second step, to determine the optimum particle size, all the size fractions were studied through two-level full factorial experiments. Again, collector and depressant dosage were used as variables. After the optimum particle size range was identified (particle size that simultaneously leads to higher grade and recovery than industrial requirements, i.e., 33 and 60%, respectively, for P The entire set of experimental data was analyzed globally by multiple regression, measuring the effects of those variables and fitting a model. This global analysis was made using Statistica Finally, to find the optimum operating conditions, a canonical analysis was made of the fitted surfaces. The canonical form is the reduction of the response surface that allows one to determine the nature of the stationary point and the response system. This canonical analysis involved the use of Maple The fitted empirical equation for each response (P The expected minimum for each response, if it exists, will be a set of conditions ( Due to the translation of the axes to stationary point Therefore, based on Eqs. The sign and magnitude of the characteristic roots In this work, the performance of the apatite flotation process was evaluated based on two responses: P The samples were composed of the same minerals, the only variation being their relative proportions. The mineralogical composition obtained by XRD showed that the ore consisted of apatite as the preponderant mineral phase. Quartz, in all size fractions, and goethite (iron mineral), mainly in the two finer size fractions, were also abundant. The main gangue minerals associated with apatite are quartz and iron minerals. Minor amounts of anatase, goyazite, dolomite, magnetite, muscovite, rutile, vermiculite, diopside, hematite, ilmenite, micaceous minerals and mixed-layer phyllosilicates composed of phlogopite and vermiculite were observed in the different size fractions. The results obtained from the scanning electron microscope equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (SEM/EDS) show in greater detail the presence of apatite (mineral of interest) as isolated grains or in diverse associations or with inclusions of other gangue minerals. The SEM/EDS analyses also allowed for the identification of some mineral phases (barite, pyrochlore, baddeleyite, monazite and romanechite or hollandite) in minor and trace quantities, which were not identified by XRD. Examples of SEM images of some samples are presented in The chemical composition determined as the major oxide content in the seven different size fractions is shown in The ore consisted mainly of 25.47% CaO, 25.27% SiO Although the P The global mineralogical composition (combination of particle counting using optical microscopy, chemical analysis and X-ray diffraction) by fraction is shown in The grade/recovery curves in It can also be observed in The tests performed, simultaneously with the highest collector dosage (360 Otherwise, the experiments which were carried out simultaneously with the lowest collector dosage (120 All of experimental steps results served as the basis for a global statistical analysis. A multiple regression was applied on the experimental data in order to quantify the main effects of variables, as well as those of the interactions and the quadratic contributions, to responses: P An analysis of the parameters of estimated equations indicates that all the variables affected both responses, independently of their form as a single variable, as an interaction between the variables, or as a pure quadratic term. The variables often exert a contradictory effect on each response, as observed in the signs of the parameters. As expected, the operational conditions under which the P  The results of the global statistical analysis confirm the tendencies observed in the previous analysis of the grade/recovery curves. Another step was then carried out to determine the optimum set of operational conditions based on a canonical analysis (Eqs. A closer examination of Equation From Eq. It is true that the higher the value (in module) of that variable ( All the aforementioned analyses of the optimum operating conditions led us to conclude that the simultaneous use of a low collector dosage (50 The same procedure was applied in the P As mentioned previously, the optimum operational conditions for P Based on the P The major conclusions of the present investigation are as follows: Fine and coarse particles showed different sensitivities to the reagent concentration. For instance, higher P For the coarser fractions (+65 # and +100 #) the P The P The authors would like to thank the Brazilian research funding agencies FAPEMIG and CNPq for their financial aid and the company Bunge Fertilizers Brazil for its technical support.