Highly dispersed Fe-Cu bimetallic oxide nanoparticles were successfully encapsulated in hollow Silicalite-1 single crystals (Fe2O3
                     CuO@Hol S-1) by tetrapropylammonium hydroxide (TPAOH) hydrothermal treatment with an “impregnation-dissolution-recrystallization” process. Due to the Fe-Cu bimetallic interaction compared with single iron oxide, Fe-Cu bimetallic oxide exhibits a higher dispersion with the particle size decreasing from ∼11.3nm to ∼3.7nm. For aqueous phenol degradation, the Fe2O3
                     CuO@Hol S-1 catalyst exhibits high activity attributed to the enhanced transport of reactants/products in the short microporous channels (20nm) and the small metal oxide particle size. Interestingly, the particle size of encapsulated Fe2O3
                     CuO (3.7nm) is larger than that of zeolite micropore (0.53nm), which helps preventing the leaching of metal oxide that is a significant problem for conventional supported Fe catalyst in this reaction.Fenton-type oxidation has attracted great attention as an advanced oxidation process for degradation of environmental pollutants such as phenol Zeolites as metal supports have attracted interest due to their high hydrothermal stability, uniform micropores, and unique shape selectivity which can be applied in catalytic operations In this report, we propose an effective approach involving highly dispersed Fe-Cu bimetallic oxide particles encapsulated into the hollow Silicalite-1 (Hol S-1) crystal using suitable precursor salts. As expected, the activity of metal can be effectively improved when encapsulated in the interior of hollow zeolite for the liquid phase reaction. For aqueous phenol degradation, the catalytic activity of Fe oxide and Fe-Cu bimetallic oxide encapsulated in Hol S-1 was found to be about 7.5 and 20 times higher than that of Fe oxide supported on conventional nano-S-1 zeolite, respectively. The excellent activity is benefited from the high dispersion of metal oxide nanoparticles, the strong Fe-Cu bimetallic interaction and the short channels in the hollow zeolite wall. Interestingly, the hollow crystal wall with micropores prevents the leaching of encapsulated metal oxide, enhancing the catalyst reusability. The present work provides a general and robust strategy to prepare multi-metallic catalysts with well-dispersed nanoparticles with high activity and reusability for the reaction of phenol degradation. For the recent research on the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants Silicalite-1 (S-1) was synthesized with the clear solution method. Typically, 15.4 Fe The as-prepared Fe CuO/S-1 was prepared by the same method as Fe Bimetals encapsulated in the hollow S-1 were prepared by similar methods as the single metals. FeCl The real Fe and Cu loadings on the samples are listed in As compared, Fe Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Rigaku Smartlab diffractometer using a nickel-filtered CuKα X-ray source at a scanning rate of 0.02° over the range between 5° and 80°. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were taken on a Tecnai G2 20 S-twin instrument (FEI Company) with an acceleration voltage of 200 Ar isotherms were measured with a Quantachrome autosorb-iQ2 gas adsorption analyzer at −186 The elemental analysis of catalysts was carried out on a Perkin Elmer OPTIMA 2000DV ICP Optical Emission Spectrometer. H The degradation of phenol in aqueous solution was performed in a stirred glass reactor. The reaction conditions were as follows: the reaction temperature 50 The C  Figs.     To further investigate the metal oxide species, the To gain a better understanding of the interaction between Fe, Cu and support, H As the catalytic reaction often depends on the diffusion of reactants and the physicochemical properties of the active centre, the phenol degradation was applied as a probe reaction to evaluate the influence of hollow structure and the Fe-Cu bimetallic effect. Plots of ln(C More interestingly, the size of the encapsulated Fe Fe-Cu binary metal oxide nanoparticles with a small average size of 3.7 This work was supported by the State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals (KF1605), by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: