In nanotechnology, classification in the micron and submicron range is of growing interest. Usually, hydrocyclones do not reach these low cut sizes. This study presents a special batch processing technique using a 20mm hydrocyclone for classification in the micron range. This hydrocyclone was equipped with a special underflow box that stored the coarse particles. The overflow was recirculated to the hydrocyclone entrance. A set of experiments was conducted using this batch hydrocyclone technology. Quartz with particle size <20μm and a SiC/Si residue with size <10μm was fed to the hydrocyclone, which operated in a closed circuit for 120min. The results showed that the hydrocyclone preferably separates the particles that are >1μm in the first 60min. Later, the particles in the submicron range were increasingly discharged in the underflow. A simulation for the classification in a batch hydrocyclone with a closed circuit and underflow box is presented.Cyclones are suitable for separating disperse feed materials in a wide range of particle sizes, but cut sizes of >10 Small, 10 When treating particle sizes in the micron range, conventional cyclone classification reaches their limit. The reasons for the limited effect are: Increasing influence of surface forces compared to the field forces. Particle–particle interactions play an increasing role. Centrifugal forces are too low to produce sufficiently high settling velocities, and Increased influence of Brownian particle diffusion, which counteracts the separation. With the growing economic importance of nanotechnology in the This study presents a special hydrocyclone technology with increased separation efficiency due to the use of a batch process in closed circuit. The subject of this study was a multi-stage separation performed in a single 20 To model the single batch cyclone in a closed circuit ( This operation is shown in It was assumed that the overflow was repeatedly recirculated as new feed. For the As per the definition, the separation curve is: This together with Eq. From Eq. Dividing Eq. After n cycles, the separation curve becomes: If all the repeated operations of the cascade are equal, the separation curve can be written as: Let us assume that for a single cyclone with a closed underflow the separation function for the first run can be described by the following formula: Thus, each turn of the cyclone cascade results in additional smaller particles being discharged into the accumulation vessel.The slope of the curve The experiments with the hydrocyclone were performed in a closed circuit with an overflow and an accumulation box for the coarse product according to The experiments were carried out over a period of 120 The time dependency of the solid concentration in the accumulation box and of the mass recovery in the underflow is presented in Discharging the underflow ( Consequently, the expression for the separation function shown in Eq. Now, combining Eqs. With Eq. The calculations were carried out using only the particle size distribution at the beginning of the separation. Eq. The different theoretical separation functions show  Due to further simplifying assumptions in the model, better agreement between calculations and experiments cannot be expected. It is remarkable that theory and practical tests agree that The recycling of silicon carbide SiC and silicon Si from wafer sawing slurries is an actual challenge in the solar industry (   Obviously, a disadvantage of the proposed classification in the The tests have shown that it was optimal to haven an apex with a diameter of 5 Batch processing in a hydrocyclone operated with a closed underflow and recirculated overflow delivers a remarkable increase in the separation effect. With an increasing number of recirculations, more fines in the micron range were separated. The energy expenditure in this closed circuit is high. Therefore, this technology makes sense for small amounts of valuable material as in the nanotechnology and biotechnology fields. Further improvement and classification in the sub-micron range will be obtained by using smaller cyclones at higher operating pressures. A quasi-continuous operation can be achieved by a discontinuous discharge of the underflow box. These variants are the subject of further development.