Thermoset polymer has considerable useful properties in structure, energy and marine industries. Polyepoxide or epoxy is widely used in composite matrix materials, and therefore, the adhesion between the reinforcement and the matrix is crucial. In order to enhance the adhesion conceptually, single steel fiber reinforcement polymer (SRP) was used in a polyepoxide matrix. The fiber pull-out test (FPO) was used to evaluate the adhesion properties by using thin films of copper for the wire fiber. For comparison, the results of the FPO for uncoated fiber with an average surface roughness of Ra = 0.03 μm were obtained. The results show an increase in toughness and strength compared with uncoated rougher fiber. The results of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) clearly show that copper debonding requires an interface fracture energy and there is a possibility of copper diffusion, which is confirmed by point EDX. The energy absorption of the wire thin film copper increased by 42%, and the maximum force pull-out increased by 14%. The modeling of the current study shows the crack initiation starts from the side of the fiber pull-out direction, and the maximum stress component was just near the free non-encompassed wire.Aligned fiber-reinforced composite materials have a high fiber modulus, and the failure approach is linear elastic. For this purpose, many failed models in composite materials have been developed by using elastic fracture This paper demonstrates the experimental and simulated mechanical properties, energy absorption and sheer strength of steel fiber deposited with a thin film of copper in a polyepoxide matrix composite. A single steel fiber in an epoxy matrix was investigated using single fiber pullout. On the other hand, the impact test was employed to evaluate the impact toughness of the composite material. Solid steel wire with a 0.85 mm diameter (BSA18) of low carbon-manganese steel (Mn/Si-alloyed) was used as reinforcement material. The copper coating was done using copper sulfate in an electroplating bath, before that the wire cleaned by diluted hydrochloric acid. Copper coating thickness found as average 0.3 microns. The specification and chemical composition are shown in SRP samples were fabricated by adding polyepoxide in a ratio of 3:1 to hardener and stirred until the resin became more viscous by means of reaching the gel-point. Then, it was poured in a mold with a vertical aligned steel fiber. After 24 h at room temperature, the resin was dry, and the mold was released. The samples were left for another seven days for further cross-linking of the structure so that they would be ready for tests. There are two different kinds of samples used in this research, fiber pull-out (FPO) samples and impact test samples. The FPO samples are cylindrical with a 140 mm length and 10 mm diameter, and a wire of 0.85 mm is mounted in the center of the sample, as shown in The force expected to pull the fiber out of the FPO samples was determined with a tensile machine test. Most specialists have expected that the deliberate power is equivalent to a shearing power that is connected to the whole interface and appropriated consistently. In view of this suspicion, the shear quality When the reinforcement (fiber) inherent limitation for the force exceeds the breaking strength, the fiber will rupture before pull-out occurs. Therefore, this restriction can obtained by defining the critical fiber embedment length lc: For fiber tensile breaking stress can express by: Thus, when the embedded length is greater than lc, failure will happen in the portion of the fiber that is not embedded in the matrix. The boundary conditions of the pull-out specimen are shown in The adhesion failure modeling used static loading and mixed mode damage onset displacement criteria, and the interfacial strength σ For impact toughness calculated from energy absorbed that taken using Charpy test The SFR in this research used a single fiber for pull-out embedded in polyepoxide in order to investigate the mechanical properties of adhesion between the fiber and the matrix. In The data given for FPO and the tensile test for the fiber itself were illustrated in The modeling of the FPO based on the previous experimental data collected with the boundary condition has been applied to the corresponding data collected, such as the actual effective plastic stress-strain curve ( Energy absorbed for 4% volume friction (ASTM D256-87) is tabulated in In From all that has been mentioned above, the outstanding results are that of the copper layer prompt used to enhance the mechanical reinforcement of the steel fiber in the matrix. Copper thin film appears more wettable than the steel wire alone, the results of SEM and FPO of SRP has confirmed that copper behaves as an interface between carbon and iron, explained experimentally by FPO, which found the maximum true stress found 1237 MPa. The impact toughness was more stable and reached to 0.206 J/mm This research was partially supported by