The preparation of fine powders by grinding may be accomplished either by wet or dry processes, the differences between these have been discussed. It is well known that there are many mechanical properties which have direct effects upon the grindabilities of solids, breaking properties in particular. In addition, the difference of breaking strength in different atmospheres is also known. In this study, dynamic bending tests were carried out, using a drop weight method, on glass, to assess the quantitative effect of a water atmosphere on fracture probability. The influence of the crack length on the glass surface and repeated impact on the difference of fracture probability in water and in air was also studied. As a result, it was found that the fracture probability in water was larger than that in air when the crack length of the glass surface and the input energy to the specimen were constant. The above difference increased with decreasing crack length and input energy to the specimen. It was confirmed that a wet grinding process is useful from the point of view of fracture energy.crack length (μm) input energy (J) input energy in air atmosphere (J) input energy in water atmosphere (J) gravitational acceleration (=9.8) (m height of ball (cm, m) mass of ball (kg) impact number of ball (–) number of fractured specimen (–) number of feed specimen (=50) (–) fracture probability (–) The preparation of fine powders is important in mineral processing, the ceramic industry, the electronics industry etc. The production of fine or ultra-fine particles may be accomplished either by break down or by build up processes. The break down process i.e. comminution, is an important step in many industries in which raw materials are converted into intermediate or final products, and is very widely applicable. In the design, construction, operation and control of comminution process, it is essential to understand the mechanical properties of the feed materials. Mechanical properties are especially related to the grindabilities and breaking properties ( Dynamic bending tests have been carried out on glass to understand the effect of atmosphere on fracture probability ( The sample used was silica glass, i.e. commercial slide glass for microscopes. In wet grinding processes, the formation of a new fracture surface, or a crack, and the adsorption of water on the new surface, or its penetration into the crack, occur simultaneously. The procedure for wet bending tests was as follows: (1) A drop of distilled water was carefully dropped on the center of the tension side of the test piece. (2) The center was pressed by the Vickers diamond of an Akashi Micro Hardness Tester with an automatic loading system so that a crack was formed. The dry bending tests were performed with the same procedure as that for the wet ones except for the first step of the above procedure. The crack was formed by the Vickers diamond of right quadrangular pyramid, which had an angle of 136° between the opposite faces. Two kinds of crack length were defined as (3) The bending tests were carried out with a drop weight method.  The ball was made of alumina with diameter 1.5 The fracture probability,      In this paper, a fundamental study of dry and wet grinding was carried out from the viewpoint of bending tests. The results are summarized as follows: The fracture probability in water was larger than that in air when the input energy to the glass specimen was constant. The above difference increased with decrease in crack length and input energy. It was confirmed that wet grinding is useful from the point of view of fracture energy. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Johoku Chemical CO., LTD.