The aim of this paper is to investigate wear and tribological properties of powder metallurgy processed Ti-6Al-4V with additions of ZrO2 to produce Ti-6Al-4V/ZrO2 composites consolidated via spark plasma sintering. The spark plasma sintered compacts were examined using optical microscopy (OM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. Dry sliding wear tests were carried out at 5 N and 10 N using a pin-on-disk tribometer. Optical micrographs showed that additions of ZrO2 to Ti-6Al-4V promoted the formation of agglomerated ZrO2-rich particles in the matrix of Ti-6Al-4V. The friction coefficient values were very similar for all compositions, with values ranging between 0.35 and 0.55, with the lowest COF value recorded for Ti6Al4V/5ZrO2 composite at 10 N applied load. Wear and microhardness results indicate that the hardness and the wear resistance improved with increasing content of ZrO2. The lowest surface degradation was observed for Ti-6Al-4V with 10% ZrO2. The low wear resistance of Ti-6Al-4V in comparison to Ti-6Al-4V/ZrO2 composites can be attributed to the low hardness of this alloy. Adding ZrO2 to Ti-6Al-4V was found to significantly improve the wear and hardness properties of Ti-6Al-4V and may therefore potentially broaden the scope of application and performance of Ti-based materials in critical applications; particularly where wear and friction are critical concerns.Titanium and titanium alloys are known to be very strong, lightweight materials with excellent corrosion resistance; making them choice materials in aircraft parts, implants, heat exchangers, sporting equipment, power plants and automotive parts. Properties of titanium are largely dependent on their structure and can thus be grouped into four key categories of alpha, near alpha, α + β and beta structures. Alloying elements like aluminum, vanadium, iron, zirconium, tantalum, molybdenum and many others are commonly added to titanium to manipulate its structure and properties for various applications. Ti-6Al-4V is an α + β alloy of titanium, containing 6 wt% aluminum and 4 wt% vanadium. This alloy is the most widely used alloy of titanium, accounting for close to 50% usage of all titanium alloys. The aerospace industry accounts for the widest use of Ti-6Al-4V alloy because of its high strength to weight ratio and good high temperature properties. Furthermore, the good corrosion resistance of this alloy makes it incredibly useful in the marine and biomedical fields Reinforcing titanium with second-phase particles to form titanium matrix composites (TMCs) has been found to significantly improve its properties. Maseko et al. Sintering is one of the most important steps in the consolidation of materials synthesized through powder metallurgy routes. Spark plasma sintering technique can successfully compact powders in a matter of minutes, through simultaneous application of high pulsed direct current and mechanical pressure applied by plungers through the graphite die. The pressure that is applied during heating causes plastic deformation of the metallic matrix phases and leads to high densification at lower temperatures and shorter times. Furthermore, the electric current induces an elevation in temperature within the sample by Joule effects Extensive studies have been carried out on the characterization of wear and tribological properties of titanium alloys and composites using different methods. Haftlang et al. In view of the above, the aim of this study is to evaluate the tribological wear and hardness properties of spark plasma sintered Ti-6Al-4V composites reinforced with zirconia particles under dry conditions. Samples of Ti-6Al-4V + Prior to evaluating the phase and structural characteristics, all samples were prepared following standard sample preparation procedure. Samples were sectioned using a Struers® automatic cutting machine. The cut samples were then hot mounted with Bakelite to facilitate handling during the grinding and polishing steps. Samples were ground using 120–1200 grit silicon carbide papers, followed by polishing with diamond suspension and fine polishing with colloidal silica suspension to obtain mirror-like surface finish. This was followed by removing the samples from the mounting and then rinsing in distilled water and drying. To reveal the microstructure morphologies, polished samples were etched with Kroll’s reagent (3 ml HF + 6 ml HNO The hardness was evaluated using INNOVATEST Falcon 500 Vickers micro hardness tester. Indentations were made at 10 randomly selected areas on each sample using a pyramid diamond indenter with a square base and an angle of 136 degrees. The Vickers hardness, Hv Tribology measurements were carried out on Anton Parr tribometer using the ball-on-disk technique. The tribometer is equipped with double Linear Voltage Displacement Transducer (LVDT) sensors, as well as an automatic arm which allows for automatic start of measurements. The LVDT sensors are located on each side of the automatic arm and are used to measure the frictional force. Wear tests were carried out in air at room temperature. A smooth 6 mm ceramic ball of alumina (Al Optical images showing microstructures of Ti-6Al-4V with and without ZrO The microhardness values obtained for all compositions are presented in Second phase particles, or reinforcements in a metal matrix hinder the motion of dislocations during plastic deformation, hence the higher hardness values can be observed The evolution of coefficient of friction (CoF) with time is illustrated in A closer look at the CoF curves shows that while CoF values of the composites were high in the initial stages of the test, they quickly reached stabilization and maintained constant values throughout the test. The CoF values of Ti-6Al-4V on the other hand, continue to increase right until the end of the test. The increasing CoF may be due to the poor hardness properties observed for this material. Worn out surfaces for wear tests at 10 N were analyzed using SEM and the micrographs of the wear tracks are given in Wear and hardness properties of unreinforced Ti-6Al-4V and Ti-6Al-4V composites with 5 and 10 wt% ZrO The authors would like to acknowledge the National Research Foundation (NRF) in South Africa for financial support.