In a recent paper, ( The Table 2 should be revised. Indeed, according to ( All the broken bonds are completely the same and it is really unclear to speak about “Ca-F” and “F-Ca” bonds. Indeed, the Ca atoms have not unsaturated bonds: broken bonds are not compensated by the closest atoms in terms of electrons. Hence, the atoms on the surface are not neutral, which explains the existence of a global surface energy that authors calculate in the paper. Also, the crushing stage leads to the generation of two surfaces that, gathered, should reform the bulk. For the (3 1 1) surface, the authors report 5 Ca-F broken bonds out of 6 total broken bonds. It indicates that the reciprocal formed surface has 5 F-Ca broken bonds to respect the global stoichiometry of the uncrushed particle. Thus, if the fluorite is cleaved on the (3 1 1) surface, it will form a mixture of Ca-terminated surfaces and F-terminated surfaces in equal proportion. A calculation on the number of calcium atoms on the surface is then completely false because the F-terminated surfaces are not taken into account. The authors should have generated both the Ca-terminated and the F-terminated surfaces to compare the adsorption of oleate and water onto them. As the adsorption depends mainly on the calcium atoms, we do think that the response of the surface-water-oleate system will be totally different between the Ca-terminated and the F-terminated surfaces. The main aim of the paper is to link crystallographic properties to macroscopic phenomena as flotation: the global response of the (3 1 1) surface should be studied and not only the half (Ca-terminated surfaces). The same remark can be done for the (1 1 1) surface: the authors display a surface where the uppermost atoms are calcium. This surface can be called a Ca-terminated one. The reciprocal surface generated with this method should then be terminated by two planes of fluorine atoms, as displayed in It induces that, during the crushing stage, the two surfaces are formed in equal proportion and then the F-terminated surface should also be studied. However, in such case, the calcium atoms are eight-coordinated, resulting in no reactivity for them, while the surface fluorine atoms are just two-coordinated which seems very unfavoured. At least, the comparison between the different methods that can be used to generate the surfaces should be compared through a complete DFT study. We think that only one type of the (3 1 1) surface exists and that the one generated by the authors is wrong. We do not think that 5 Ca-F bonds are broken. Indeed, if it was the case, it would let a four-coordinated calcium on the surface, which seems really unfavoured in terms of energy. The high surface energy for this surface, presented in Table 2, could be attributed to this wrong input configuration of the surface. We rather think that the (3 1 1) surface is the one presented in our It appears difficult to discuss the flotation results displayed in Fig. 4. First, the flotation performed on a non-deslimed material (0–45 µm) cannot be compared with other size fractions because the fine particles are known to be mechanically entrained and to lead to high collector consumption. Also, the differences in floatability can be just explained by the variation of specific surface area: much more collector is needed to make hydrophobic the fluorite surface for fine particles. The hydrophobic/hydrophilic balance may be less favourable for the flotation of finer size fraction even if the ratio between exposed cleavage planes is the same. Besides the higher mechanical entrainment for the 0–45 µm size fraction, a better flocculation ability has also to be considered for this fraction. Furthermore, the solubility rate of the mineral is kinetically enhanced as the specific surface area is higher. The fluorite is a semi-soluble salt and this higher dissolution rate induces a worse adsorption of the collector. The gravity force should also be considered as it depends on the particle size and is included in the forces balance that controls the attachment-detachment probabilities (P Furthermore, the UV–vis absorption spectra are not in accordance with the interpretations done on the floatability graphs. Indeed, the three different spectra (S1, S2, S3) display very different behaviours for the three size fractions while the three different floatability graphs (S1, S2, S3) demonstrate very close behaviours for the three size fractions. On each spectrum, the absorption rate repartition between the size fractions is different, indicating that no conclusion can be done on them. Finally, no conclusion at all can be done since, when the Table 2 will be corrected, there will be no difference between the (1 1 1) and the (1 1 0) surfaces in terms of calcium sites density. The energies computed by molecular dynamics simulation using a COMPASS force field in Table 3 are aberrant and present huge heterogeneity between the different surfaces, from −25 313.08 kcal/mol for the (1 1 1) surface to −223.60 kcal/mol to the (1 1 0) surface. It could derive from the non-adsorption of oleate molecules on the (1 1 0), showed on Fig. 6, b. In that case, interaction energies cannot be presented as the oleate molecules just interact between themselves and not with the surface. In addition, it is well admitted that a classical chemisorption displays adsorption energies between −100 and −500 kJ/mol ( For the MD simulations, it is very weird for us to observe a well-organized structure of the water bulk but only before the MD simulation. The snapshots presented after the MD simulations in Fig. 6 are very strange for the (1 1 1) and the (3 1 1) surfaces. After the MD simulation, for these surfaces, all the water molecules are oriented towards the top of the cell, which appears very weird considering the clustering of water molecules described in the literature ( The adsorption configuration of the oleate molecules cannot be discussed for the presented (3 1 1) and (1 1 1) surfaces as they are not the most energetically favoured. Four-coordinated calcium are highly reactive on the surface and may differ a lot from five-coordinated or seven-coordinated calcium atoms, respectively. Moreover, the Fig. 7 presents carboxyl groups with a double-bonded oxygen and a single-bonded oxygen in anionic form. When the deprotonation reaction occurs, the lone electron is delocalized on the whole carboxyl group and the two C-O bonds are perfectly equivalent, being partly double. The relative concentration of carbon and oxygen in NaOl is a weird indicator for monitoring the distance between oleate molecules and the surface. What does it mean? We can imagine that it displays the distances between the surface and the oleate. We are wondering what point is chosen as the reference point for the surface. Moreover, the distance displayed is not in accordance with what is described on Fig. 7, as the authors mention around 2 Å between the oxygen atoms and the surface calcium atoms. The fluorite is not an anisotropic mineral but an isotropic mineral. It is part of the cubic crystallographic system which induces that a = b = c and α = β = γ = 90°. It means that all the fluorite properties are exactly the same in the three spatial directions, which is the definition for “isotropic mineral”. However, the isotropy is not considered for the cleavage of the mineral. The authors do not explain the reason why the fluorite could develop cleavages along the (1 1 0) plane when the particle size is decreased. Also, the fact that the (1 1 1) plane is the characteristic diffraction plane for the fluorite is due to the high atom number in the structure factor, indicating that the (1 1 1) plane contains many atoms. Then, it does not necessarily point out that it is the main cleavage plane. The X-Ray Diffraction is a bulk analysis method and surfaces can be hardly analysed with this method. First, the authors do not precise what procedure has been followed for the XRD analyses. The method used for peaks comparison is not well explained and we do not think that it is correct. Indeed, the full width at half maximum should be used instead of the surface area under the peak. We do think that the observations on the peak comparison on XRD patterns are pure artefacts. When the fluorite particles size is increased, the particles orientate easily, forming large surfaces that can set on the XRD medium. The XRD pattern from JCPDS displays a I In sum, the change from the (1 1 1) cleavage plane to the (1 1 0) cleavage plane when the size fraction is reduced should be considered as a simple hypothesis since no strong scientific proof is obtained from experimental data. Morphometric analyses should be conducted to prove the hypothesis but not with XRD, which is a bulk method strongly dependent on the size fraction and then impacted by an artefact. The floatability studies are incorrectly exploited and cannot prove any morphology change in the fluorite particles when their size is decreased, as many parameters impacting the flotation recovery have not been taken into account. The UV–vis absorption spectra do not bring any clue as they display complete different behaviours for the three fluorites that, yet, seem very similar in terms of flotation behaviours and chemical analyses. Finally, the molecular dynamics simulations are based on wrong non-stoichiometric surfaces that are highly reactive as they are not the most energetically favoured. The computed interaction energies are of several range of magnitude higher than those expected in this kind of system (