Complications related to treatment of long bone fractures still stand as a major challenge for orthopaedic surgeons. Elucidation of the mechanisms of bone healing and development, and the subsequent alteration of these mechanisms to improve outcomes, typically requires animal models as an intermediary between in vitro and human clinical studies. Murine models are some of the most commonly used in translational research, and mouse fracture models are particularly diverse, offering a wide variety of customization with distinct benefits and limitations depending on the study. This review critically examines three common femur fracture models in the mouse, namely cortical hole, 3-point fracture (Einhorn), and segmental bone defect. We lay out the general procedure for execution of each model, evaluate the practical implications and important advantages/disadvantages of each and describe recent innovations. Furthermore, we explore the applications that each model is best adapted for in the context of the current state of murine orthopaedic research.Fractures are the most common injury type in older patients, with women aged 60 years having a residual lifetime fracture risk of 56% Murine models have been extensively used to analyze the biology of fracture healing and bone development. Several factors contribute to the utility of mouse models, particularly their low cost, availability of genetically modified strains, rapid fracture healing time course, and the development of intricate fixation systems capable of repairing such small bones. Several different bones in the mouse have been used to investigate fracture healing, namely the femur, tibia, radius, ulna, mandible, and calvarium An ideal fracture model would be inexpensive, reproducible, not encumbered with technical difficulties, and have high throughput. Although the fracture models presented in this paper do not fit all of these criteria, they best represent each category to a varying degree. It is known that bone healing may occur through different pathways, most prominently through endochondral and intramembranous ossification. Different factors, including distance between bony ends, viability of periosteum, and rigidity of fixation help determine which mechanism predominates The cortical hole (i.e., corticotomy) model provides an adequate way to systematically deliver testing agents directly to the site of the defect as well as investigate bone healing mechanisms. In general, the procedure creates small boreholes in the mid-diaphysis of the femur. The location and size limit the defect to the cortical area. A longitudinal incision is made on the lateral aspect of the thigh with further dissection of the fascial plane to expose the femur where the defect will be implemented. A borehole typically between 0.8-1mm in diameter is made through the mid-shaft, penetrating down to the level of bone marrow using a Dremel tool, dental drill, or another comparable device. The defect is made under constant saline irrigation in order to cleanse the exposed area from debris and prevent heat transfer to the bone. The bi-cortical variant follows the same general procedure as the unilateral with an additional borehole continued through the opposite side of the femur ( The cortical hole fracture model has a few notable benefits. The procedure is relatively simple, quick, and easily reproducible. The cortical hole model does not require a fixation device, and does not carry the same risk for post-operative fractures as the other models Some drawbacks do exist. Outside of orthopaedic oncology and bone infections, the borehole is not a common clinical presentation. In the process of creating the borehole, there is risk of soft tissue damage as it must be retracted to visualize the bone injury site at the midline as well as prevent entanglement with the drill shaft. The cortical hole model has numerous applications including, genetic, pharmaceutical, and bone healing studies. A model studying intramembranous ossification was created using the cortical hole The fracture model first developed by Bonnarens and Einhorn is a commonly used model The 3-point fracture/Einhorn fracture model is a procedure that has been adapted for mice from a rat protocol The model developed by Einhorn and Bonnarens was originally a rat model. This was repurposed for murine use with some modifications. The thin IM nails used in mice are typically angulated to an unacceptable level for most investigators when the guillotine is applied. Guidewires remedy this problem by retaining patency of the medullary canal for insertion of the nail after use of the guillotine Depending on the fixation device, insertion into the canal can be accomplished by either a dedicated drill or twisting the implant by hand through the bone of the intercondylar fossa. The implant can then be advanced until the proximal end of the medullary canal is felt. Drilling is not absolutely necessary with pin insertion as the size of the mouse femur allows twisting to be a reliable method for penetration The guillotine device itself is an important tool in this protocol. The two variables that manipulate the force applied to the extremity is the initial height of the load to be dropped and the weight of the load. Factors such as sex, weight, and strain should be accounted for when operating, as force needed to generate the fracture will be different Proper fixation of a closed femoral fracture is paramount for the success of union and creating a reproducible method to study fracture healing. Stiffness and rigidity of the fracture fixation directly correlates to the amount of motion within the fracture site and developing callus. This amount of motion correlates to the type and degree of healing The 3-point fracture model is relatively cheap, requiring a guillotine and IM fixation (micro screw, locking nail, or pin) all of which are comparatively more cost effective than plates or external fixators Compared to the corticotomy and segmental bone defect, this model is limited in its capacity to study the effects of locally applied therapeutics and pharmaceuticals The 3-point bending fracture mechanism with the guillotine also presents some issues with fracture creation. The procedure is less reproducible than open models as the femur is not exposed and the surgeon must use bony landmarks to place the guillotine over the diaphysis. The fracture can become displaced, poorly positioned, and has a higher probability of sustaining comminution Several studies mimicking trauma have incorporated the 3-point fracture into novel models. In a novel study concurrent bilateral lung contusions and femoral fracture via the 3-point technique sought to mimic a high impact accident The segmental bone defect (SBD) is one of the oldest models for studying bone healing and development. The simplicity and customizability of the model has attracted investigators to its use for decades, and thus a host of different defect sizes and fixation types have been developed. Recent calls for standardization to allow for the comparison of different studies have led to the commercialization of fixation equipment. Although there is still much work to be done in the way of standardization, the following outlines the general procedure, defect sizes, fixation types, and current applications, along the with advantages and disadvantages to different methods to help guide the investigator in choosing the best practice for their experiment. There are a multitude of methods to create SBDs in the mouse femur. Most commonly, the skin on the lateral hind limb is incised and the femur is exposed via dissection through the fascial plane between the anterior and posterior muscle compartments. The femur is then bluntly stripped of its muscular attachments, and fixation is applied. This may be a small gauge hypodermic needle passed through the intercondylar fossa and into the medullary canal identical to the procedure used in the 3-point fracture (IM nail) There are various subtypes within the murine segmental femoral defect. These are primarily stratified by the fixation type and defect size but can also be stratified by the presence of scaffold and concurrent use of disease models. Defect sizes used in the mouse femur typically range from 0 mm to 5 mm Four main methods of fixation exist for segmental femoral defects in mice. These are the IM nail, plate, pin-clip, and external fixation. These fixation types vary in difficulty and cost, and they have their own specific advantages and disadvantages. A brief summary of these factors, model subtypes that have been developed, and example references for each fixation type can be found in IM nail fixation of SBDs in the femur of mice is the simplest and most cost-effective form for stabilizing these defects ( More recently, plate fixation has become a popular choice for fixation of mouse segmental femoral defects Developed in 2008 by Menger and colleagues, the pin-clip fixation for femoral shaft defects in mice is a combination of a conventional IM nail with a custom transcortical clip, resembling a staple, to add stability ( External fixation of diaphyseal femoral defects in mice requires custom made devices that span the length of the defect from the outside of the animal and use bicortical pins penetrating the skin and soft tissue to align the bone ( The SBD lends itself to the use of vectors for local drug delivery, development of biocompatible materials for replacement of clinical autografting procedures, and tissue engineering. Drug vectors commonly include drug impregnated load bearing scaffolds and non-load bearing collagen sponges. Scaffolds are typically made of poly(propylene) fumarate/tricalcium phosphate, polycaprolactone, or synthetic collagen in combination with hydroxyapatite or beta tricalcium phosphate. More thorough discussions of scaffold design and materials, as well as the state of scaffold research can be found in the following references The present and future relevance of fracture healing complications in the clinical setting have driven the need for translational research to optimize reliable models. The aforementioned models offer a variety of modifications that cater to a wider array of studies. The cortical hole model (corticotomy) is a technically simple and efficient way to create a mid-diaphyseal bony defect. The simplicity of the model and open access to the defect site lend it to use in high throughput pharmaceutical and transgenic studies. The Einhorn, or 3-point fracture, model is currently the most viable option for creation of closed diaphyseal femur fractures in mice. Of the models discussed above the 3-point fracture produces the least soft tissue damage if performed correctly. Additionally, the procedure is relatively simple, quick, and cost effective, especially when compared to the segmental defect. It is most compatible with studies investigating multisystem trauma, shock, and bone contusion. However, the 3-point fracture is limited in its ability to study locally applied pharmaceuticals as the blunt fracture does not always create a clean defect. In some cases, many animals may need to be excluded based on poor fracture creation. The segmental defect is the oldest studied model and the most customizable. It is best suited for materials/tissue engineering paradigms, understanding healing of CSDs, locally applied pharmaceuticals, and the exciting new realm of periosteal reconstruction studies. Multiple fixation options exist for the segmental defect, and new innovations in design have brought MRI compatible, radiolucent, variable stiffness, and more clinically relevant fixations to the forefront. Together, these models represent a diverse, highly applicable mode of translational research for the development of fracture healing therapies and elucidation of bone healing mechanisms. The insights into clinical relevance, experimental procedures, relevant parameters, modifications, and current applications presented in this review hopefully provide the reader with the base knowledge required to perform and strategically modify their research design to serve their needs while retaining a standard by which other studies can be compared. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. The project was funded, in part, with support from the Indiana Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute funded, in part by UL1TR002529 and by AG060621 (MAK) from the National Institutes of Health. The work was also supported by the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery at Indiana University School of Medicine (MAK) as well as the Richard L. Roudebush VA Medical Center, Indianapolis IN with VA Merit #BX003751 (MAK). The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the aforementioned agencies.