A bioceramic composite coating was fabricated onto AISI 316L stainless steel in situ by laser cladding with mixed powders of CaHPO4•2H2O and CaCO3 without a bonding agent. The microstructures of the mixed powders and cladding layer were investigated by scanning electron microscopy, and the compositions/phases were analyzed by electron diffraction spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction. The major phases in the coating are β-Ca2P2O7 and Ca10 (PO4)6(OH)2. The coating consists of the granular HAP that is distributed among the overlapped club-shaped β-Ca2P2O7. It is shown that there is a bonded structure of the epitaxial planar growth between the substrate and cladding layer, and there is evidently a typical cellular microstructure in the middle and an equiaxed microstructure at the top of the cladding layer. The microstructure evolution in the cladding layer was analyzed based on the ratio of temperature gradient to solidification rate (G
                     /
                     R) produced in laser cladding.Bioceramics hold great promise. Amongst these, calcium phosphate ceramics have been regarded as attractive bone substitute materials in the orthopedic field. Extensive fundamental studies and clinical applications have demonstrated that calcium phosphate-based biomaterials are both biocompatible and osteoconductive HAP and other complex calcium phosphate salts are the end products of the biological mineralization process. β-calcium pyrophosphate (β-DCP or β-Ca Although HAP and calcium phosphate ceramics have outstanding biocompatibilities, they can not be directly used in load bearing situations because of their poor mechanical properties Laser cladding is a new surface processing technology, but is rarely used in growing HAP coating on metal substrates. In this paper, a new bioceramic composite coating, which consists of HAP and β-Ca The substrate material was AISI 316L stainless steel with a chemical composition (wt.%) of 0.021 C, 17.61 Cr, 12.45 Ni, 2.29 Mo, 0.69 Si, 1.05 Mn, 0.002 S, and 0.031 P, and was machined into 50 The raw powder material pre-placed on the substrate contained (wt.%) 80% CaHPO The microstructure of the mixed powders was characterized using the S-520 scanning electron microscope (SEM) and the microstructure of the cladding layer was characterized using the JSM-6700F scanning electron microscope. The compositions were analyzed by energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS, CMIZ). The phases were identified by the XRD method using the D8 Discover GADDS X-ray diffractometer. The XRD pattern of the mixed powders was recorded using Cr target K The bioceramic composite coatings, with thickness in the range of 1.0–2.0 mm, were produced under a wide range of laser power and focus diameters. The most important parameter that affected the completion of laser cladding was the scanning speed. Only when the scanning speed was less than 5 mm/s could the laser cladding process proceed. In order to verify the quality of the pre-mixed powders and grown phases of the cladding coating, X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements were performed.  Results of XRD analysis, as shown in  The SEM photo of the microstructure of the mixed powders that contained (wt.%) 80% CaHPO The microstructures obtained by the Metallography Image Analysis System between the substrate and cladding layer, and both in the middle and at the top of the cladding layer, are shown in Ascending from the bottom of the melting pool, because  The bioceramic composite coating (42.6% HAP and 57.4%β-Ca The microstructure of the coating consists of minute granular HAP that is distributed among the overlapped club-shaped or needle-like β-Ca There is a bonded structure of the epitaxial planar growth between the substrate and cladding layer, and both a typical cellular microstructure in the middle and an equiaxed microstructure at the top of the cladding layer. The microstructure evolution of the cladding layer is determined by the ratio of temperature gradient to solidification rate (