The adsorption and action of four starch polymers in talc flocculation has been studied. The polymers include: two chemically modified starch polymers (carboxymethyl (CM) and phenyl succinate (PS) starch), with similar molecular weight but variation in terms of added aromatic functionality; and two unmodified starch polymers, Gelose 80 and Gelose 50, which vary in their amylose:amylopectin ratio. The adsorption behaviour of the polymers indicated that the carboxyl groups of the functionalised polymers discouraged adsorption at low ionic strength, with the non-charged Gelose polymers adsorbing to higher densities in spite of having lower molecular weights. AFM imaging and contact angle measurements indicated that the polymers interact similarly with the talc basal plane in terms of coverage and effect on hydrophobicity, with minor differences in adsorbed layer thickness. CM and PS starch had an equal and best effect on the flocculation behaviour of talc suspension. The settling rate of bare talc was 0.14mh−1; the two functionalised starch polymers increased the settling rate to 1.7 and 2mh−1 for CM and PS starch, respectively (at 8mgL−1 concentration). Whereas different chemical substitution had no pronounced effect on the settling behaviour, the relative content of amylose to amylopectin did produce differences in settling. Gelose 80 (80% amylose; 1.3mh−1 settling rate at 40mgL−1 concentration) performed better when compared Gelose 50 (50% amylose; 0.65mh−1 settling rate at 40mgL−1 concentration). Of the two unmodified starch polymers, Gelose 80 gave the best overall settling performance, highlighting the effect of the linear starch chains in encouraging good bridging flocculation.In mineral processing operations, clay minerals (e.g., talc, kaolinite, smectite) are commonly present within the waste mineral stream (tails). Tailings with high quantities of such layered silicates are difficult to treat to recover the process water (which is recycled back into the mineral processing plant). The use of high molecular weight polymers as flocculants is necessary to increase the efficiency of the solid–liquid separation in gravity-assisted thickeners. Polymeric flocculants have been used in a number of studies to show how the recovery of water from mineral waste slurry can be improved The effect of polymer molecular weight on flocculation behaviour has been investigated by some researchers The effect of polymer charge density on flocculation and dewatering of tailings is also described in the literature. Treatment of kaolinite dispersions with anionic polyacrylamide flocculants displayed reduced flocculation performance with increasing charge fraction Less well-studied than issues of molecular weight and charge is the effect of specific variation in the polymer flocculant architecture and functional group chemistry. The work in this paper is concerned with the settling of dilute dispersions containing talc particles, and examines the effect of varying polymer chemistry at a specific molecular weight. The goal of this study is to draw a comparison between: (i) two starch polymers: CM and PS starch, with quite similar molecular weight and carboxymethyl substitution, but PS starch has an additional aromatic functionality; and (ii) between two starch polymers (Gelose 80 and Gelose 50) with similar molecular weight but varying degrees of branching (i.e. amylose:amylopectin ratio). Talc, the chosen mineral for this study, is a hydrophobic layered silicate that displays substantial colloid stability and slow settling, and thus requires flocculation aids to enable such suspensions to be efficiently dewatered. It is also a common waste mineral in flotation, and thus is a major constituent of mineral tailings that require dewatering. Studying the flocculation of talc suspensions is therefore of relevance for many mineral processing operations. In addition to detailed studies of settling of talc suspensions in the absence and presence of the chosen polymers, data were obtained on their adsorption on talc particles, and their ability to alter the wettability of the hydrophobic talc surface (expected to influence the particle–particle interactions). In addition, the morphology of the adsorbed polymer layers on a talc surface was characterized with Four different starch-based polymers were used as supplied from National Starch. These polymers are: carboxymethyl (CM) and phenyl succinate (PS) starches; Gelose 50 (50–50% combination of linear amylose and branched amylopectin starch) and Gelose 80 (80% linear amylose starch). The chemical structures of linear and branched starches are presented in The weight average molecular weight ( All solutions were prepared using high-purity Milli-Q water (Elga UHQ unit; pH 5.5, specific conductivity <0.5 For the preparation of polymer stock solutions a dissolution procedure developed by National Starch was used. A 3.0 Talc rock mineral (Delaware, USA; impurity free Fine talc particles (>99% pure; Merck, Germany; XPS analysis indicated that the surface concentration of impurities such as Fe and Al was negligible Adsorption studies were performed using the batch depletion method. A 3.5 The adsorbed amount ( AFM images were obtained using a Nanoscope MultiMode 8 AFM (Bruker) in solution ( Each mineral talc sample was freshly cleaved and mounted using double-sided tape on a magnetic stainless steel disc. One o-ring from the liquid cell was placed on top of the sample, the liquid cell was then lowered onto the o-ring to form a seal. This arrangement ensures that subsequent solutions only come into contact with the mineral surface and the cleaned interior of the flow cell. The polymer solution was injected into the liquid cell using a 1 The AFM adsorbed polymer parameters have been determined using 5 Advancing contact angle ( Talc suspensions (8 The measured adsorption isotherms for the four starch polymers adsorbed onto the talc mineral at pH 7.5 are shown in When a comparison is made between CM and PS starches (similar molecular weight), the adsorbed density on talc was greater for PS compared to CM. It appears that the presence of the aromatic group on PS starch facilitated hydrophobic interactions between the polymer and the talc basal face, and hence enhanced the adsorption process. The comparison of the two smaller polymers, with variation in degree of branching, reveals that the more branched polymer (G50) adsorbs more onto the talc surface than does the more linear polymer (G80). One possible explanation for this behaviour would be the ability of the branched polymer to form a denser conformation on the talc surface. In all cases, the starch polymer isotherms exhibit a continual increase in the adsorbed amount without a clear plateau. High affinity isotherms without a clear plateau may indicate adsorption onto a heterogeneous surface. Such isotherms can be fitted by the Freundlich isotherm. The Freundlich model considers the presence of binding sites with variation in affinity for the adsorbing molecules. Freundlich isotherms are represented by the equation Typical tapping mode atomic force microscopy (TMAFM) images of freshly cleaved talc taken  The morphology of adsorbed CM starch onto freshly cleaved talc is shown in The coverage and thickness of the polymer layer allows us to correlate the adsorbed polymer density from the AFM imaging with that obtained from the adsorption isotherms. Based on the adsorption isotherms for polymer concentration of 40 In the case of Gelose 50 ( Contact angles obtained by the captive bubble method for the freshly cleaved talc basal plane in the absence of polymer, as well as the values after immersion for 30 Also given in The settling rates (m Despite the poor suspension settling behaviour, the sediment bed formed after 24 Upon treatment of the suspension with the two carboxylated starch polymers at the lowest concentration (8 The effect of the two carboxylated starch polymers on bed consolidation and supernatant clarity are shown in The results for the two Gelose polymers with variation in degree of branching are shown in The consolidation and clarity data are plotted in Fig. 7B and C, respectively. It can be seen that both Gelose polymers, in spite of their small influence on the settling rate, in comparison with the PS and CM starch polymers, they produce higher sediment consolidation, in fact comparable to that of the bare talc bed. There was no impact of polymer structure type, as the sediments flocculated with both Gelose polymers behaved similarly across the concentration range. The supernatant clarity data ( The adsorption of four starch polymers on talc has been studied with adsorption isotherms, AFM imaging, and contact angle measurements. Polymer functional group chemistry, molecular weight, and degree of branching are all seen to influence the characteristics of the adsorbed polymer layer at equilibrium (adsorbed amount, morphology, and reduction of hydrophobicity). The flocculation and settling behaviour of talc suspensions treated with these polymers has revealed that molecular weight is the primary characteristic that controls settling rate, bed consolidation, and supernatant clarity. The secondary characteristic of the polymers that influences settling behaviour is the degree of branching (amylopectin content) of the starch sample, with more linear starch chains (amylose) being more effective in flocculating the talc suspensions. It was also seen that variations in functional group chemistry (inclusion of an aromatic group alongside carboxyl groups) did not result in settling behaviour modification). Financial support for this study was received from the Australian Research Council and AMIRA International sponsors of Project P498C (which include National Starch, Anglo Platinum, CP Kelco and Newcrest). Russell Schumann of Levay and Co. Environmental Services is acknowledged for his for assistance with SEC measurements. The authors would also like to thank Associate Professor Allan Pring (South Australian Museum, Adelaide) for the provision of the talc mineral sample used for AFM and contact angle measurements, and Dr. Audrey Beaussart for drawing the polymer structures.