Due to the very fine grained nature and complexity of the platinum bearing ores from the Bushveld Complex in South Africa, numerous processing operations have investigated alternate comminution devices that can be used to liberate the platinum group minerals of the Merensky and UG2 ores at a coarser grind, at reduced energy consumption and increased throughput. In this study, the mineralogy and flotation performance of product from the high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) was evaluated and compared to a conventional ball mill product with the aim of determining whether the HPGR product could be used for flotation without any further grinding. Results show that for both the Merensky and UG2 platinum ores, the HPGR product showed more fines and less coarse content compared to the ball mill product. No conclusive evidence of preferential liberation was observed for samples prepared by particle bed breakage. The best flotation results were obtained from the ball mill product. The results from this study have shown the definite need for an integrated approach for the interpretation of the results that extends beyond just measurements of valuable mineral liberation.The Bushveld Complex in South Africa is one of the largest layered intrusions in the world and hosts economic deposits of chromium, vanadium and the platinum group elements (PGEs) ( The extraction of the valuable minerals from the Merensky and UG2 ore is a highly energy intensive process. This is due to the significant energy used in the grinding and liberation of the very fine grained PGMs ( Several possible applications of the HPGR in comminution circuits include the following ( One of the further potential advantages of the HPGR are the reports of preferential weakening and or/liberation of particles. Recent systematic studies on BMS ores, such as The effect of the HPGR on downstream processes however, is of key interest when assessing its value. The focus of this study on platinum ores is to determine whether the product of the HPGR is sufficiently comminuted for the primary flotation circuit, without any subsequent grinding requirements. In order to assess this, the flotation performance in terms of PGE recovery of the Merensky and UG2 platinum ores will be evaluated. Given that there are also several different HPGR operational and design variables that have significant effects on energy consumption and the degree of mineral liberation ( Bulk samples of both Merensky and UG2 platinum ore were sourced from the Lonmin Platinum mines as run of mine ore from the Western Limb of the Bushveld Complex. The bulk samples were crushed to feed top sizes of 12 A Krupp Polysius LABWAL HPGR located at Mintek in Johannesburg with 250 A Pilot scale ball mill with a 700 A 3 Representative feed samples of the Merensky and UG2 platinum ores were sent to Mintek for QEMSCAN analysis of the bulk mineralogy. Complimentary ICP-OES chemical assays were also obtained in order to assess the quality of the QEMSCAN analysis. Samples of HPGR product from the three different operating conditions, as well as a sample of the ball mill product were collected for PGM liberation analysis. These were analyzed by MLA at ALS Mineralogy in Australia. The bulk mineralogy of the Merensky and UG2 platinum ores is given in The particle size distributions of the HPGR and ball mill product are illustrated for the Merensky and UG2 ores in The degree of liberation of the PGM was analyzed according their associations with other minerals is illustrated in The Merensky liberation profiles in The degree of liberation of the PGMs in the UG2 ore is noted to be significantly lower than in the Merensky ore (  The final mass water recovery from the flotation of the UG2 platinum ore was the greatest for the HPGR sample generated at a operating gap of 3 Cumulative PGE grade recovery curves are shown in Compared to the two Merensky HPGR products generated at a 1.5 PGE grade recovery curves for the UG2 platinum ore, show that the highest recovery was obtained for the HPGR product generated at 3 In order to understand the differences in the flotation performance between samples prepared by ball milling or HPGR, one has to consider the effects of the difference in particle size distribution, liberation, and the effect of wet versus dry milling on the flotation performance. From the results presented in this study on the two platinum ores, the first two effects can be interpreted, whereas for the third, the arguments presented by The second effect is the difference in liberation on the flotation performance. Although the ball mill product showed better liberation characteristics than the HPGR sample for the Merensky ore, the UG2 ore sample did not. A high final PGE recovery was obtained for the Merensky ore, which can also be attributed to the good liberation in terms of the amount of liberation PGMs, as well as PGMs locked in floatable BMS. For the UG2 ore, the good recovery cannot necessarily be attributed to liberation, given that there was no significant difference in the PGM liberation characteristics between the samples produced by ball milling or HPGR generated at a 1.5 Therefore, the effect of wet versus dry milling on the flotation performance of the PGMs needs to be considered. The results from this study show no conclusive evidence of preferential liberation of samples prepared by particle bed breakage (HPGR) compared to conventional ball milling. A possible trend of preferential liberation of the PGMs from the BMS was noted and needs further investigation. The broader particle size distribution of the HPGR product in this study was not ideal for the flotation of the Merensky and UG2 PGM ores, due to the greater abundance of fine particles (affecting concentrate grade) and coarse particles (affecting overall recovery). The best flotation performance was obtained with the ball mill product, which is attributed to its superior particle size distribution (steeper), liberation (Merensky ore only), and the detrimental effect which dry grinding may have on the flotation of PGM ore. This study has shown the need for an integrated approach when interpreting and understanding the effects of different comminution devices on flotation performance, and which is not only dictated by measurement of valuable mineral liberation. A size by size PGM mineralogical analysis of the HPGR and ball mill product and flotation concentrate samples would assist in understanding the implications of generating particles with different comminution devices on downstream processes. Similarly, an investigation into the effect of wet versus dry milling on the surface chemistry of the PGM and BMS would also be of benefit. The authors would like to acknowledge Centre for Minerals Research at the University of Cape Town, Lonmin Platinum, Polysius, the NRF SARChI Chair in Mineral Beneficiation and THRIP for their support of this study.