This first part of research presents an analysis of the electro-assisted reductive leaching (ERL) of refractory chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) performed in HCl media using an electrolytic cell operated at room temperature and pressure. This is as an alternative approach to decrease the passivation phenomenon observed in the ERL process with sulfuric acid, which favored the chalcopyrite reduction kinetics at pulp densities >10 g/L. Different variables were optimized to understand the electro-reduction kinetics of chalcopyrite such as: acid concentration, current density and pulp density. The reaction mechanism proposed was complemented with the electrochemical techniques, and SEM-EDS and X-ray diffraction analyses. The results revealed that electro-reduction of chalcopyrite performed in HCl at a pulp density of 100 g/L present a higher reduction rate than that of the sulfuric acid system. From a mechanistic viewpoint, chalcopyrite can be sequentially reduced to chalcocite and metallic copper, respectively. The latter is a very reactive species which can be easily oxidized in the presence of air and remaining hydrochloric acid, to cuprous hydroxychloride or atacamite species (Cu2Cl(OH)3) and cuprite (Cu2O) when the solid residue is withdrawn from the reactor. These copper species are highly soluble in aqueous solutions which can permit the recovery of copper. From an energetic viewpoint, the energy consumption of the HCl electrolytic system is lower than that of the H2SO4 electrolytic system.About 70% of the world copper resources are present as chalcopyrite (CuFeS Chemical reductive processes have been considered an alternative to decrease the passivation of chalcopyrite commonly found in oxidative processes. In these processes, chalcopyrite is predominantly reduced to less refractory copper sulfide species such as chalcocite. The reduction of chalcopyrite has been assessed in the presence of sulfate or chloride media and chemical reducing agents such as: iron, copper, lead, aluminum, H Chalcopyrite is considered a semi-conductor that can be electrolytically decomposed ( There are a few references related to the electroreduction of chalcopyrite slurries in electrolytic cells ( From a mechanistic viewpoint, chalcopyrite can be electrolytically reduced in acid solutions to bornite or chalcocite, according to Eqs. Chalcocite can be further electro-reduced to metallic copper, according to Eq. The global reduction of chalcopyrite to copper can be represented by Eq. Thermodynamic data for chalcopyrite reduction (Eh-pH diagram) revealed that the stability boundaries of these reduced copper phases are all below the reversible hydrogen potential, which means that their actual formation will depend on kinetic factors, in particular the over-potential of hydrogen evolution (  Monoatomic hydrogen can recombine through a chemical or an electrochemical event, according to Eqs. It is worth mentioning that the number of electrons transferred in Eq. Hydrogen sulfide produced during the reduction of chalcopyrite (Eqs. In this research, the electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite was studied systematically in HCl solutions with different techniques, in order to elucidate suitable conditions which can accelerate and increase the conversion of chalcopyrite reduction at pulp densities higher than 10 g/L while minimizing the energy consumption. This information is valuable to understand the phenomena occurring in the chalcopyrite electro-reduction using HCl media, and to develop in future an alternate hydrometallurgical reductive process for the recovery of copper from refractory chalcopyrite. Electrochemical tests were carried out employing a chalcopyrite electrode. For the preparation of the working electrode, a pure chalcopyrite crystal was mounted in a teflon rod in order to obtain a rotating disk electrode with exposed active area of 19.6 mm Electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite was studied employing a chalcopyrite concentrate obtained from Peñoles, Minera el Roble, Cuencamé, Durango, which contains: 68.3% chalcopyrite, 15.4% pyrite, 9.1% sphalerite and 1.5% galena. The particle size distribution in the concentrate is found to be in the range 11 μm to 16 μm with an average size of 13.3 μm. The experiments were carried out at room temperature (25 °C) employing a conventional three-electrode electrochemical cell, which comprised of a reference electrode of Ag/AgCl (all potentials presented in this work were changed to the standard hydrogen electrode, SHE), a graphite rod (Alfa Aesar) as the counter-electrode and a massive crystal of chalcopyrite as the working electrode. The cell was connected to a potentiostat/galvanostat (Versastat 4-400, PAR). The surface of the working electrode was polished with a silicon carbide paper (800, 1200 and 2400) and was then polished in wet to a mirror-like finish employing alumina powder (0.5 μm) for 50 min. The electrode was rinsed with deionized water and was sonicated with acetone for 10 min. This methodology was followed before each voltammetric experiment. The electrochemical tests were performed employing an aqueous solution of 2 M HCl at room temperature. Nitrogen was bubbled in the aqueous solutions for 30 min to eliminate the dissolved O The electro-assisted reductive leaching experiments were carried out employing the same experimental scheme reported previously ( The procedure employed to carry out the electro-assisted reductive leaching experiments was as follows. A 250 mL solution containing 0.5, 1 or 2 M HCl was placed in the cathodic compartment of the electrolytic cell, and an equal volume (250 mL) of an aqueous solution containing H The cumulative current efficiency at any time, t, was calculated for the electro-assisted reductive leaching experiments as a function of chalcopyrite conversion using the Eq. Based on the results reported elsewhere ( The potential sweep was inverted into the anodic direction in order to elucidate the formation of different copper products that may be obtained during the previous cathodic scan performed at different vertex potentials. In addition, linear voltammetries were carried out by scanning the potential from OCP to −100, −400 and − 600 mV  When the potential sweep is performed at more cathodic potential than −100 mV This result reveals that chalcopyrite can be reduced to chalcocite in the HCl medium at −400 mV The EDS analysis for the chalcopyrite electrode polarized from OCP to −400 mV Finally, the polarization of the chalcopyrite electrode performed from OCP to −600 mV An analysis of the charge density transferred during the cathodic scan at −600 mV In order to complement the last result, a linear voltammetry was repeated from OCP to −600 mV It is interesting to mention that the EDS also showed the presence of Fe and S ( Having studied the different solid species that can be formed during the electrochemical reduction of chalcopyrite in HCl solutions, the electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite was assessed in an electrolytic cell with HCl solution in the cathodic compartment while varying the current density, acid concentration and pulp density. H It is worth mentioning that the electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite can be followed by the amount of ferrous ions released from the mineral into the bulk solution ( It is also possible to observe in The XRD analysis ( On the other hand, when the solid residue is filtered with rinsing using deionized water, the XRD analysis ( It may also be mentioned that no lead compound is found in the solid residues ( The effect of the applied current was evaluated on the chalcopyrite reduction kinetics in 2 M HCl at room temperature, and results of chalcopyritic iron dissolution vs time are shown in Comparing the results of the applied current in HCl (  A comparison of results at 0.7 A ( The effect of the hydrochloric acid concentration on the chalcopyrite reduction kinetics was assessed at a pulp density of 10 g/L, 0.7 A and 25 °C. Results for the chalcopyritic iron dissolution illustrated in The cathode potentials recorded in the experiments ( Based on the results of One of the main limitations of electro-reductive leaching of chalcopyrite with sulfuric acid is related to its inefficiency to treat pulp densities of 100 g/L or higher due to the passivation phenomenon caused by elemental sulfur ( A comparison of the results shows that practically 100% of chalcopyrite can be reduced at 10 g/L pulp density, as against the release of 57% of chalcopyritic iron at 100 g/L pulp density, in 300 min. The chalcopyrite reduction at 100 g/L pulp density presents a higher kinetics and conversion in the HCl than in H  The solid residue obtained in the electro-assisted reduction of chalcopyrite at 100 g/L was characterized by XRD phase analysis ( Hydrogen sulfide species can also react with sulfur dioxide producing sulfur, according to Eq. These reactions (Eqs. H In HCl system, there is no possibility to produce sulfur by a similar mechanism as that shown in Eqs. Elemental sulfur is a known hydrophobic and non-conducting species which promotes passivation phenomenon in an electrochemical system as observed in the electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite in sulfuric acid ( In order to further confirm that the electro-assisted reductive leaching of chalcopyrite in HCl does not generate elemental sulfur, cathodic polarization of electrode pre-treated in H As regards the copper products obtained at 100 g/L, The absence of any lead species in the residue is interesting ( The surface of the cathode (carbon) was examined after completing the electro-assisted reduction of chalcopyrite at 100 g/L. A change in the color of the cathode surface from black to gray suggests the electrodeposition of lead on the carbon surface. According to It is important to note that the economic feasibility and the emissions of CO  The electrochemical reduction of chalcopyrite in the HCl solutions can yield chalcocite at −400 mV Metallic copper formed from the chalcopyrite reduction, is easily oxidized to different species, when the solid residue is withdrawn from the reactor. This includes cuprite obtained by the aerial oxidation of metallic copper, and atacamite by the interaction of the metallic copper with the remaining HCl and oxygen of the air. The formation of elemental sulfur during the electro-assisted reduction of chalcopyrite is not observed in the system operated with HCl at a pulp density of 100 g/L unlike the one for the sulfuric acid system. In the HCl medium the passivation of the chalcopyrite during the electro-assisted reduction is minimal, while obtaining a chalcopyritic iron recovery of ~57% in 300 min. The electro-assisted reduction of chalcopyrite performed in HCl is more efficient in terms of energy consumption than in H Chalcopyrite reduction kinetics and current efficiency are favored when the HCl concentration is increased from 0.5 to 2 M since: a) chalcopyrite reduction reaction depends on the concentration of protons, and b) the kinetics of the monoatomic hydrogen generation (reducing agent) is increased. The authors are grateful to CONACyT (México) for the postgraduate scholarship awarded to Víctor Martínez-Gómez. Also, the collaboration of Sergio Rodríguez Arias in this investigation is duly recognized.