The Influence of the ternary alloying element Cu on eutectic nucleation in an Al-10 wt.%Si alloy in unmodified and Sr-modified conditions was studied. Cu additions had a relatively minor effect on the unmodified eutectic nucleation frequency. In Sr-modified Al–Si alloys where the nucleation frequency of the eutectic grains is very low compared to the unmodified alloys, the addition of Cu significantly increased the nucleation frequency. Further increases in the Cu concentration resulted in a continuous increase in the number of eutectic grains and an associated decrease in their size. It is proposed that constitutional supercooling plays an important role in promoting the nucleation of eutectic grains ahead of the solidifying interface especially in the case of Sr-modified Al–Si alloys.Aluminium dendrites and Al–Si eutectic phases are the major microstructural features of many commercial Al–Si foundry alloys and control of the microstructure of these phases is an important step in achieving quality castings. The influence of solute on primary grain formation has been extensively studied Despite the evidence that the addition of eutectic modifiers such as Sr, Na and Sb influence the eutectic nucleation frequency, macroscopic evolution and hence casting defect formation When Cu is added to the Al–Si alloy, solute is rejected from both of the eutectic constituents. Due to this solute segregation ahead of the eutectic interface the equilibrium melting point (liquidus temperature) changes locally from a low value at the interface towards the higher liquidus temperature for the alloy. When the actual temperature of the melt is less than the equilibrium liquidus temperature, the melt in this boundary layer is constitutionally supercooled A deeper understanding of how solute additions influence the nucleation pattern of the Al–Si eutectic would allow for the development of higher quality castings. For example, refinement in the eutectic grain size through promoting nucleation either by adding more potent nuclei or by creating more constitutional supercooling to activate nuclei The experiments were conducted with an Al-10 wt.% Si commercial purity alloy as the high eutectic volume fraction of this alloy assists metallographic observation of individual eutectic grains. Approximately 1 kg of the base alloy (Al–10Si) along with appropriate amounts of commercial purity Si and the Al-33 wt.% Cu master alloy were weighed and melted in a graphite crucible in an electric resistance furnace at 760 °C. For Sr-modified alloys, Sr was added to the melt using an Al-10 wt.% Sr master alloy (in rod form) 20 min before casting. The Cu contents range from 1 wt.% Cu to 6 wt.% Cu. Two stainless steel cups, coated with boron nitride were preheated at 760 °C. Samples were taken simultaneously by dipping these stainless steel cups into the melt. A type N thermocouple covered with a stainless steel sleeve was lowered into one of the samples to record the temperature. Approximately half way through the eutectic reaction the second sample was quenched by lowering the stainless steel cup into a water bath at room temperature. For each alloy a cooling curve and a derivative curve were plotted. Reaction temperatures were measured using Tamminen's method Samples were then etched in Keller's reagent (2 ml HF, 3 ml HCl, 5 ml HNO A chemical analysis sample was produced by pouring each melt into a chill mould. The composition was analysed using Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Due to the limitation of ICP analysis in analysing Phosphorous (P) in Al, one sample of the Al–Si–Cu unmodified series and one of the Al–Si–Cu–Sr-modified series were analysed using Glow-Discharge Mass Spectroscopy (GDMS). It was found that the P content in these samples varied between 3 and 6 ppm. As the base alloy (Al–10Si-commercial purity) was used for all the alloys presented in this work, this range of P contents is expected to be representative. The solidification path of the Al–10Si–Cu alloys was obtained from solidification simulations from For each alloy composition cooling curves, several micrographs and macrographs of the quenched samples were analysed to determine the solidification path and the eutectic grain nucleation density of each sample. However, only an example micrograph or macrograph is provided for each sample depending on which method enables more accurate measurement and observation of the eutectic grain nucleation frequency.  Unlike the case of primary phase solidification, quantifying the eutectic nucleation frequency is challenging due to the lack of suitable metallographic techniques. Especially in the case of unmodified alloys in which the eutectic nucleation frequency is very high and the eutectic solidifies with a non-faceted interface led by silicon. In this case, differentiating the individual eutectic cells on metallographic sample sections is difficult even in the samples that were quenched during eutectic solidification. Research suggests that in the case of unmodified alloys most of the eutectic cells originate from a polyhedral silicon particle which itself nucleates on the AlP particles present as an impurity phase in the melt In Sr-modified alloys eutectic grains were relatively large in size and easier to identify after interrupting solidification by quenching the sample. There is a noticeable increase in the eutectic cell nucleation frequency and a concomitant decrease in the eutectic grain size with further increases in Cu content. By observing the derivative of the thermal analysis curves and the quenched microstructures of all the samples, it appears that in unmodified alloys and Sr-modified alloys aluminium dendrites nucleated as the primary phase followed by Al–Si eutectic formation. The Al–Si–CuAl The Al–Si eutectic nucleation frequency in unmodified and Sr-modified alloys was measured (in unmodified samples, the total number of polyhedral Si/m The results clearly show that the addition of Cu to an Al–Si binary alloy significantly changes the eutectic nucleation frequency. The area density of eutectic grains in unmodified and Sr−modified alloy samples are plotted against the Cu content (in wt.%) and presented in The ternary Cu segregates ahead of the eutectic–liquid interface during Al–Si eutectic solidification as the partition coefficient of Cu in Si is approximately zero (which indicates that most of the Cu gets rejected as the silicon solidifies) and that of Cu in Al is 0.17. Easton et al. It has been suggested in the literature that the concept of the growth restriction factor can be applied to eutectic growth Traditionally the calculation of a growth restriction factor (Q) is made by considering the behaviour of a single solute element with respect to a single primary phase (k and m in Equation To calculate the grain size it is assumed that the eutectic grains are equally distributed in an area of 625 mm In the case of the unmodified alloy (as observed from In the Sr-modified alloys, the eutectic grain size versus 1/Q has a steeper line of best fit with a higher intercept value (slope = 2.35 mm °C and intercept = 2.19 mm). This provides some rationale for the role of available solute in eutectic nucleation, particularly in the Sr-modified alloys where nucleation difficulties are expected. An increase in the gradient and intercept values implies that the addition of Sr to Al–Si alloys decreases the nucleation potency and the nuclei number density in the melt. It is known that the addition of eutectic modifiers to Al–Si alloys significantly decreases the density and potency of the nuclei available for eutectic grains ( In this case, the minimum constitutional supercooling required to trigger nucleation on the most potent nucleant will be much higher compared to unmodified alloys and the difference is supported by observations from the cooling curve analysis of Al–Si–X unmodified and Sr-modified alloys. These differences will result in a nucleation-free zone (the sum of first two terms in Equation The above analysis indicates that even though the Q value of Cu with respect to Al–Si eutectic is lower compared with similar calculations in primary phase solidification Cu still acts to grain refine the Sr-modified eutectic. However, the direct application of the Interdependence model to predict the eutectic grain size may be limited due to the reason that in the case of unmodified eutectic, the eutectic nucleates as discrete grains with a higher nucleation frequency and growth of these grains proceeds with a convoluted interface, led by silicon. The Interdependence model is based on the planar interface assumption which in the case of unmodified Al–Si eutectic is not applicable. However, in the case of Sr-modified eutectic the interface growth characteristics in terms of interface morphology and the growth velocity, have some similarities with aluminium dendrites. Hence, it is of interest to examine further the applicability of the Interdependency model to predict the eutectic grain size in the case of Sr-modified eutectic. The value of ΔT The interface velocity of the Sr-modified eutectic grain just after nucleation was calculated using the equation From  The addition of the ternary alloying element Cu to an Al–10Si alloy influences the Al–Si eutectic nucleation frequency. The constitutionally supercooled zone that is created due to Cu segregation in front of the eutectic interface plays an important role in promoting further nucleation ahead of the interface. As has been established for primary α-Al grains, it is proposed that the Al–Si eutectic grain size is related to the inverse of the alloy growth restriction factor by the empirical relationship d The linear relationship in the case of unmodified alloys revealed that in commercial purity unmodified alloys there is an abundance of potent nuclei particles (small value of grain size 0.28 mm at the intercept of the 1/Q plot) and the undercooling required for nucleation, ΔTn, is relatively low (low slope of the 1/Q plot of 0.44 mm On the other hand, the addition of Sr to Al–Si alloys significantly decreases the density (large intercept value of 2.19 mm) and potency of the nuclei (steeper slope of 2.35 mm