Now into the fourth decade of widespread clinical acceptance and use, joint replacement surgery has had a major impact on the preservation of physical independence and general health in the ageing population. However, today's data are tomorrow's history. Rather than tell clinicians and patients what they might expect today from yesterday's procedure, this chapter surveys the role of joint replacement in the treatment of degenerative disease, assesses the associated fiscal burden on society and notes the significant gaps in our current knowledge. Strategies and approaches for future study are critically reviewed.Changes in both population demographics and age-related quality of life expectations present the modern physician with a major challenge in managing degenerative conditions of the musculoskeletal system. In Western society, advances in treating the leading medical causes of mortality have progressively pushed average life-expectancy into the eight and ninth decades. Data from the United States of America indicate that those over age 65 comprise the fastest growing segment of the population. As the prevalence of these conditions has reached the level of public health concern, so too has the need for treatment strategies that durably, safely and effectively restore joint function. Recognising the challenge of managing these conditions has fostered international interest in measuring the burden of musculoskeletal disease, in terms of both its clinical impact on health-related quality of life and its financial impact on health care infrastructures. Efforts are aimed at understanding which measures can effectively deal with this epidemic, by preventing and treating chronic disability and improving quality-adjusted life years on a large scale. Despite substantial allocation of research funding toward understanding the genetic, biological and mechanical factors that contribute to articular cartilage degeneration, the goals of surgical treatment for arthritis have changed little in the past 30 years. A host of basic science efforts are pursuing genetically and biologically based therapies that aim to treat the cause rather than the effect of disease, but these novel treatments still have very limited clinical application. Joint replacement surgery is and will probably continue as the mainstay of surgical treatment for end-stage arthritis for years to come. Defining the appropriate utilisation of joint replacement surgery within demographic and diagnostic groups lies at the heart of efforts aimed at reducing the burden of degenerative disease. This, in turn, depends largely on determining the long term effectiveness of arthroplasty in terms of quality of life and health status improvement. With the increasing cost of health care, there is a growing demand that the costs of treatment be justified by proven measurement of quality of life improvement. In determining the appropriate utilisation for joint replacement surgery, and thus defining its role in the treatment of degenerative disorders, effectiveness evaluation is critical. Regional variations in the frequency of joint replacement procedures and the lack of consensus regarding many aspects of related patient care, have spurred interest in the methodology of surgical outcomes research. The aim is to better define the role of specific treatments through valid, evidence-based clinical outcome and epidemiological studies. It is important for both physicians and patients to realise that joint replacement surgery is a process that goes far beyond the technical aspects of the surgical procedure. Preoperative assessment, patient education, in-hospital care and rehabilitation all impact on treatment effectiveness and patient satisfaction. In order to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of any procedure in satisfying our goals of treatment, one must define the parameters that most affect long-term outcomes and consider how accurate our current measurement tools are in assessing these parameters. These issues form the basis for quality assurance and quality control in prescribing arthroplasty treatments with individual and aggregate benefits. To assess such benefits, we need to accurately identify the patient factors that are associated with better outcomes, the implant factors that are associated with improved survivorship and the peri- and post-operative factors that are associated with reduced morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, we must establish clinically relevant definitions for both success and failure. When all of these factors are considered, it becomes evident that there is currently no standardisation or consensus regarding the process or assessment of joint replacement surgery and little quality control over many factors that affect both utilisation and outcome. There has been a growing recognition that patients and surgeons have different expectations for surgery and define success and failure on the basis of different criteria.       Quality improvement in all aspects of the process of joint replacement surgery, from materials and component design, to surgical technique, to patient care, requires organised, longitudinal data collection as outlined above. In recent years, spurred by the pioneering efforts of Sweden and Norway, there has been a growing interest in the formation of national joint replacement registers that systematically follow all patients who undergo a specific replacement procedure. The outcomes reported by most registers are limited to implant survivorship data, and revision and mortality rates. These data are important in documenting several aspect of joint replacement surgery, including: As has been substantiated in several national registers in recent years, the incidence of joint replacement procedures has increased at a faster rate than can be ascribed solely to the effects of population increase and population ageing.  These behavioural trends among patients have led to corresponding trends amongst surgeons, many of whom have ‘softened’ their indications for joint replacement surgery. While 65 years was once considered a fairly rigid age criterion, joint replacement is now routinely performed on patients in their fifties. Although several mid-term reports have documented a decline in prosthesis durability when implanted in younger patients   Sequential design modifications have driven the cost of implants higher and higher despite the absence of data justifying these cost increases by gains in mechanical performance, long-term survivorship or clinical effectiveness. With this background of relevant issues, the following sections will discuss our current understanding of the effectiveness of joint replacement surgery in treating a variety of arthritic conditions. Several issues bear on the mechanical effectiveness of joint replacement surgery. The structural and mechanical properties of prostheses differ from those of the host bone. Their biologically inert nature means they cannot remodel according to the stresses applied to them, as does the musculoskeletal system. The coefficient of friction at the prosthetic articulation is orders of magnitude above that of the native joint and implant wear is unavoidable. Prosthesis design and implantation is based on our current understanding of joint biomechanics, some of which is based on necessary assumptions that cannot be proven with absolute certainty. Nevertheless, most joint replacements are quite mechanically effective in their ability to restore joint comfort and function for a period of time. As discussed above, prolonging the duration of this mechanically effective period is the dominant focus in engineering new generations of prostheses. Scandinavian and other registers document an annual revision rate that now averages 7–8% of the number of primary replacements and reaches a ratio of 1:3 in certain centres. The failure mode that most deserves discussion is ‘aseptic loosening,’ which accounts for 60–70% of revisions. Efforts to solve this problem have fostered interest in newer component materials that obviate the need for polyethylene. While it is widely accepted that joint replacement surgery has revolutionised the treatment of degenerative joint disease, its clinical effectiveness is strongly linked to specific features of the clinical scenarios to which it is applied. These include demographic factors (age, gender), health-related factors (diagnosis, comorbidities) and surgical factors (surgeon experience, hospital volume, implant type). The age range over which joint replacement surgery is undertaken has broadened dramatically in the past two decades. Once reserved for those between the ages of 65–80 years, these procedures are now not uncommon in patients as young as 40 or as old as 90 years. Studies of the impact of gender on arthroplasty outcomes have suggested that implant survivorship for hip and knee replacement in males is inferior in comparison to that in females. The majority of joint replacement surgery is performed for osteoarthritis. Based on various national registers, this diagnosis accounts for 70–88% of primary total hip replacements, upwards of 90% of total knee replacements and roughly 65% of total shoulder replacements. Rheumatoid arthritis and other inflammatory arthritides typically afflict patients at an earlier age and necessitate joint replacement in the 50s, although in severe cases patients with juvenile rheumatoid arthritis have undergone joint replacement in their 20s. Rheumatoid arthritis accounts for approximately 3–4% of hip and knee replacements, 11% of shoulder replacements and a majority of elbow replacements where osteoarthritis is less common. Recognising the benefit of a single, relatively low-risk treatment that is most likely to restore mobility, total hip replacement has become an increasingly common treatment for femoral neck fractures, accounting for 3–12% of primary procedures. Joint replacement surgery places a heightened demand on various organ systems and insufficient physiological reserve can have disastrous consequences. Because the prevalence of cardiac, pulmonary, metabolic and renal disease increases with age, these medical conditions significantly affect the outcomes of joint replacement surgery. Collaborative, multi-specialty patient management is critical in the pre-, peri- and postoperative periods to reduce complications and improve rehabilitation capacity. Such measures, taken to ensure that conditions are optimal for joint replacement, can have a dramatic effect on the burden of disease at a population level by reducing resource expenditure on the management of complications. In fact, such measures are likely to have a much bigger effect on collective cost-savings than that brought about by limiting implant choices through supply contracts. As financial pressures in health care increase with rising costs, the insurance industry and government sponsored health programmes are likely to demand that resource allocation be justified by evidence-based quality assurance. Interest in defining standards of care to which physicians and hospitals should be held has fostered research into the effect that surgeon and hospital volume have on clinical outcomes. Choice of implant and fixation type has also been shown to affect prosthetic survivorship. Despite these difficulties in implant assessment, national registers have uncovered some important findings, on a more general level, that have led to changes in the implant market. When the cost of joint replacement surgery is summed over the total number of patients undergoing both primary and revision surgeries, the figures are astounding. The age-related increase in degenerative musculoskeletal conditions and the rising incidence of joint replacement surgery have generated interest in quantifying the short- and long-term costs of care versus the improvement in quality-adjusted life years at a societal level. Such studies have been performed largely for hip and knee replacement surgery, using economic modelling analysis which compares operative to non-operative treatment. Relative to the costs of custodial care for those with functionally-disabling degenerative joint disease, hip and knee replacements are cost-saving over the long-term at a population level. Another method that has been applied to cost-effectiveness analysis is to quantify the ‘cost per quality of sequential well year after joint replacement surgery’. Health economists typically consider an intervention costing less than US$30 000 per well year to be an appropriate investment for society. Data on knee arthroplasty has shown that it is a relative bargain, costing roughly US$6500 per well year at 2 years post-surgery. Recent interest has also focused on ‘cost-efficiency’ when applying joint replacement to the management of arthritis. In response to economic pressures in health care, there have been efforts to reconcile the short-term expense of joint replacement surgery with issues such as implant costs, length of hospital stay, length of inpatient versus outpatient rehabilitation and hospital complication rates. One way to tackle questions regarding the role of a treatment modality is to define conditions for which it should Neuropathic arthritis is another relative contraindication to joint replacement. The absence of proprioceptive feedback in such conditions has been associated with early implant failure and loosening. If the preoperative evaluation uncovers historical, objective or radiographical findings that are uncharacteristic of more straightforward diagnoses such as osteoarthritis or rheumatoid arthritis, the diagnosis of neuropathic arthritis should be entertained. A more erosive and destructive radiographical picture is often seen. Such cases may be better treated with arthrodesis. The results of primary joint replacement for traumatic conditions have generally been inferior to the results of arthroplasty for degenerative conditions. A detailed discussion of revision joint replacement is beyond the scope of this chapter but the following brief review highlights how the likelihood of revision surgery influences the primary process. While the quality and reliability of joint replacement surgery has advanced markedly over the past three decades, experience continues to demonstrate the finite lifespan of prosthetic components. Survivorship rates vary extensively depending on the factors mentioned above. It is impossible to predict the duration of time over which any one patient is likely to enjoy uncomplicated joint function following replacement. Certain facts are, however, both intuitive and substantiated. Firstly, younger patients have a higher likelihood of revision because of both their increased activity level and their longer life-expectancy. Joint replacement surgery represents one of the most significant advancements in the history of orthopaedic surgery and is widely accepted as an effective treatment for end-stage arthritis. The role of joint replacement surgery should be defined in terms of critical outcomes analysis. When the myriad of contributing factors is considered, it becomes apparent that the quantitative measurement of health-related quality of life improvement after joint replacement surgery cannot be divorced from the circumstances under which the process and procedure are performed. In the absence of consensus regarding utilisation and assessment of joint replacement surgery, patients and clinicians should consider the various factors discussed here if clinical results are to be optimised.