In the process of copper extraction in cobalt hydrometallurgy, the copper concentration of raffinate solution needs to be monitored and controlled simultaneously. It is difficult to measure such concentration online by existing instruments and sensors. Soft sensor technique has been became an online supplement measurement for process monitoring and control. In this paper, an adaptive hybrid modeling method for copper extraction process is proposed. The proposed model is composed of simplified first principle model and block-wise recursive PLS model. The former based on material balancing calculation with some assumptions is used to describe the extraction process in general; and the latter is constructed to compensate the unmodeled characteristic and deal with the time-variant feature. A model rectification strategy is also employed to correct the final output and increase the prediction accuracy. The proposed model has been used in a cobalt hydrometallurgy pilot plant, and the prediction results indicate that the adaptive hybrid model is more precise and efficient than the other conventional models.coefficient coefficient matrix final coefficient matrix PLS model output prediction error distribution ratio of the overall offset current bias residual matrix flag flow rates of feed, scrub and strip solutions, respectively extracted metals ionic valence block size loading vector loading matrix rank of the input matrix residual latent variable flow rate of organic solution noise copper concentrations in aqueous and organic solutions that flow out of the copper concentrations in the feed, scrub and strip solutions, respectively temperature pH value reagent volume % in the organic laboratory analysis output of simplified first principal model output of hybrid model output of corrected model input and output matrices new input and output matrices forgetting factor weighting factor feed scrub strip The solvent leaching, extraction and synthesis are the most important processes in the production of cobalt from low-grade ore ( In typical extraction, the process or feed disturbances occur due to their intrinsic characteristics such as time-variant, uncertainty and noise. Therefore an accurate and efficient online measurement for the concentrations in the raffinate solution is critical to advanced process control and optimization. However, direct measurement may not always be possible because of the finical burden. Thus, one has to resort to laboratory analysis which is usually time-consuming and does not meet the requirements of real-time process control and optimization. Since offline measurement is not efficient enough, soft-sensor technique can be introduced to predict the concentrations in the raffinate solution and indirectly control the final product qualities by using the measurable secondary process variables, such as temperature, pH value and flow rate. The most popular soft-sensor modeling methods are first principle model ( Although hybrid model has many excellent attributes such as stable and robust performance, the hybrid model may be deteriorated as time going by due to the time-variant characteristics of the process caused by the equipments aging, sensors and process drifting. To deal with the time-variant characteristics of process, This paper is organized as follows. In Section Firstly, we briefly review the traditional batch PLS algorithm ( Recursive PLS algorithm updates the model as soon as some new samples available. It may be desirable not to update the model until significant amount of data are collected and the process has gone through significant changes. In this case we can accumulate a new block of data, derive a PLS sub-model on the new data block, and then combine it with the existing model. We use the following notation to represent { A PLS model based on two data block is equivalent to combining the two sub-model. To adequately adapt process changes, it is desirable to exclude extremely old data because the process has changed. An alternative approach to online adaptation is to use forgetting factors Formulate the data matrices { Derive a PLS model using NIPALS algorithm ( When a new data block { Formulate The solvent extraction process in cobalt hydrometallurgy is to purify the solution from copper, ferrous, manganese, zinc and other harmful impurities for the synthesis process. The extraction process is due to the ion transfer between the aqueous (a) and organic (o) phases described by ( The extraction process in cobalt hydrometallurgy usually contains several sub-extraction processes such as copper extraction, P204 extraction and P507 extraction. In each sub-extraction process, one or several harmful metals are purified from feed solution. Each sub-extraction process consists of extraction, scrub and re-extraction, both of which may contain several operation units. Because the sub-extraction processes are nearly same, we use copper extraction process as an example to illustrate how to establish adaptive hybrid model. Thus the proposed adaptive hybrid model can be also applied in other sub-extraction. The copper extraction process studied consists of five operation units (two for extracting, one for scrubbing and the other two for stripping). Generally, mixer-settler equipments are used. The process has three input flows (the feed solution, the scrub solution and the strip solution), and one recycling flow (the organic solution). Typical process instrumentation includes flow rate, temperature and pH value. In addition, the cobalt and impurity assays and other diagnostic measurements are performed by laboratory or process operators. The aim of the copper extraction process is to purify the copper in leaching solution from 10–20 Generally, the efficiency of re-extraction is very high. To reduce the computation load of computer, and satisfy the online prediction requirements, we build re-extraction model separately. Suppose the copper concentration of barren organic which flows out of organic tank is equal to zero, i.e. Another problem is the time-variant characteristic of the extraction process, as the organic extractant and equipment aging, therefore only using conventional hybrid model may be deteriorated as the time elapses. Hence, block-wise recursive PLS modeling method is utilized to compensate the unmodeled and time-variant characteristics. Because there are many factors that cannot be explained in practical extraction process ( In this paper, another method ( The current bias The architecture of adaptive hybrid model is illustrated in Determine the parameters such as block size Predict the copper concentration Calculate the prediction error Compute the PLS model output If a new sample is available, calculate If Compute the new PLS model output Set offset Correct the output The proposed adaptive hybrid model has been used in practical copper extraction process in a cobalt hydrometallurgy pilot plant. Sixty samples were continuously collected in two months with the interval of 24 In this case, the first 20 samples are used to train the original PLS model. The number of latent variables requires in the model is determined by cross-validation with the predicted error sum of squares (PRESS) as measure of performance ( In order to make the algorithm reasonably responsive to changes, the values of forgetting factor To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed soft-sensor model, the prediction performances are compared with simplified first principle model (  The prediction performances of the four methods are also summarized in Due to directly measure metal concentration of extraction process online may not be possible, soft-sensor technique as an important auxiliary method can be implemented instead of measurement instruments. In this paper, we present a soft-sensor model for copper extraction process in cobalt hydrometallurgy. The proposed soft-sensor model integrates with simplified first principle model and block-wise recursive PLS model. The simplified first principle model is built to predict the raffinate concentrations using material balancing calculation with some assumptions, which possesses low computational complexity and can be easily applied online. The block-wise recursive PLS model is established to compensate the unmodeled characters and copes with the time-variant feature of copper extraction process, which has the advantages of rapid calculation, less training data and can update the hybrid model online. A model rectification strategy is also employed to correct the final output of adaptive hybrid model, which can increase the prediction accuracy. The hybrid model has been used in predicting concentration of copper extraction in cobalt hydrometallurgy. Compare with other soft-sensor models, the prediction results indicate that the proposed soft senor model has better prediction and monitoring performances. We believe that the presented adaptive hybrid model structure could also be successively applied for the explorations of the various industrial processes.