A combusted coal gangue is an inorganic waste utilized for removal of heavy metal from aqueous mixtures; however, the individual adsorption capacity of this adsorbent is not high individually. Therefore, a natural polysaccharide such as alginate is utilized to make bio- inorganic composite to increase the heavy metals’ adsorption capacity. In this study, the alginate-combusted coal gangue (ACCG) composite was prepared and used as an adsorbent for Zn(II) and Mn(II) removal in batch experiments. The mineralogy, structure, and morphology of the ACCG composite were characterized. The principal parameters have been optimized, which in optimum condition, the maximum uptake of zinc and manganese was obtained 77.68 and 64.29 mg/g, respectively. To catch the mechanism of zinc and manganese adsorption, the equilibrium studies were investigated using nonlinear isotherm models in single and binary systems. The studies indicate that the adsorption process in both systems was carried out in a homogeneous and single layer surface. The amount of Zn(II) and Mn(II) adsorbed in competitive conditions were 65.4 and 53.8 mg/g, respectively. Kinetic studies indicate that intra-particle diffusion is the rate-limiting step of the adsorption process. Furthermore, thermodynamic studies demonstrated that the adsorption of zinc and manganese onto the ACCG composite was spontaneous.Over the last century, a great deal of coal gangue (CG) has been produced during coal extraction and processing activities; however, less than 15% of this waste is reused, and the rest is accumulated around coalmines and coal washing factories [ The presence of minerals such as kaolinite, illite, chromite, etc. in a CG made a coal gangue able to adsorb heavy metals [ In recent years, multitude strategy has been investigated for the progress of composite adsorbents and the structural strength including natural biopolymers and minerals to increase the heavy metal’s adsorption capacity [ According to the literature review (  The purpose of this study was to enhance the amount of Zn(II) and Mn(II) uptake of the combusted coal gangue (CCG) through creating a matrix of alginate onto the surface of the CCG sample. An adsorptive behavior of the CCG sample toward zinc and manganese adsorption was investigated by obtaining optimal adsorption conditions determining optimal isotherm model and kinetics, and thermodynamic studies. The coal gangue (CG) sample was procured from the Anjirtangeh coal washing plant (northern Iran). The CG was powdered by laboratory vibrating cup mill and sieved to the particle size of -150 μm in diameter. The sodium alginate (C To prepare the Alginate-Combusted Coal Gangue (ACCG) composite, the powdered CG sample was first combusted for 4 h in a muffle at 850 C In this method, 1.5 g alginate (white color), was first added to 15 ml ethanol (46.06 g/mol) solution under intense stirring for 10 min, until it was homogeneous. Then, 15 ml distilled water and 2 g CCG sample was added to the mixture under continuous stirring for another 5 h at ambient temperature. Then, the solid phase was separated by filter paper and then the novel composite was dried for 1 h in a heater at 50 C The chemical compositions and crystalline phases of the CCG and ACCG samples were analyzed using X-Ray fluorescence (XRF- Philips X-ray diﬀ ;ract meter X unique II) and X-Ray diffraction (XRD- Philips X-ray diﬀ ;ract meter 1140). The functional groups of the CCG and ACCG were recorded by the IR- Shimadzu UV-3101 spectrophotometer from 4000 to 400 cm The adsorption of zinc and manganese from aqueous solution onto the ACCG composite was investigated in batch system by means of 100 ml solution in a Erlenmeyer flask with volume of 250 ml containing various initial zinc and manganese concentrations (100–1000 mg/l), at different amount of the adsorbent (0.5–4 g) and different temperatures (298, 319, 331 and 343 K). The contact time was changed from 5 to 90 min until achieving an equilibrium. After investigation of various parameters involved in the adsorption process, pH of the zinc and manganese solutions was adjusted 0 to 7 and they were put on the shaker at different shaking speed (150–450 rpm). The equilibrium experiments of zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite in the single and binary system were achieved by stirring 0.75 g of adsorbent in 100 ml solution of zinc and manganese with different initial concentrations (100–1000 mg/l) at pH = 5 and 350 rpm for 30 min. To recognize adsorption isotherm study, the adsorption data of zinc and manganese from the single and binary system have been fitted to the single and multicomponent isotherm models, respectively. The equilibrium study of zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite in the single system was assessed by four isotherm models. The competitive adsorption of zinc and manganese was assessed by the extended Freundlich and Langmuir, modified Freundlich and Langmuir equations. The non-linear form of these models is represented in Table A.1 (Appendix). All constants of these isotherm models were specified using MATLAB software. Furthermore, three error functions consisting of the Marquardt’s percent standard deviation (MPSD), average relative error (ARE) and the residual root mean square error (RMSE) were calculated between the predicted values and the experimental data [ To recognize the rate-controlling step and mechanism of zinc and manganese adsorption process, the kinetic experimental data was evaluated by the reaction-based models (pseudo-first order, pseudo-second order and Ellovich) and the diffusion-based model (intra-particle diffusion). The linear form of these models are represented in Table A.2 (Appendix) [ Thermodynamic experiments of zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite were carried out at various initial concentrations of zinc and manganese from 200 to 1000 mg/l for 30 min at the temperature from T = 298 to 343 K to calculate the thermodynamic parameters such as standard Gibb’s free energy change (ΔG As seen in As seen in The band assignments and the IR spectrum of the CCG and the ACCG composite are represented in The band at approximately 560 cm The SEM images in the After loading alginate ( The EDX analysis of the CCG and ACCG composite ( The surface area and porosity of the ACCG composite, measured with N The BET analysis also computes the specific surface area and mean of the pore diameter of the ACCG composite, in which the specific surface area and mean of the pore diameter of the novel composite are about 3.086 m The zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite was performed over 10 to 90 min at the initial concentration of 1000 mg/l, pH = 4, at 298 K and the adsorbent amount of 10 g/l. The highest amount of zinc and manganese adsorption was respectively obtained at 77.2 and 53.4 mg/g within 30 min. The amount of zinc adsorbed at all stages was higher than that of manganese, which is probably due to the lower ion radius of zinc compared to manganese [ The effect of the amount of ACCG adsorbent on the removal of zinc and manganese ions was investigated for seven different adsorbent amounts (2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 20, 30 and 40 g/l) illustrated in As shown in The zinc and manganese ions can be adsorbed onto the certain amount of ACCG composites. Hence, more attention should be paid to the effect of the initial concentration of ions on the removal of metal ions. The association between the initial concentration of zinc and manganese ions and the adsorption capacity (from 100 to 1200 mg/l) is shown in In addition, the amount of zinc and manganese adsorbed at the equilibrium time follow a similar increase trend. However, the gradient of zinc adsorption is greater than that of manganese, as mentioned above; it can be due to the larger zinc ion-radius than the manganese ion. An analogous trend was apperceived in the case of manganese adsorption through combusted coal gangue [ The pH of solution is the most important controlling parameter in the removal of Zn(II) and Mn(II) from the solution, since it affects not only the formation of the metal hydroxides (Zn(OH) Maximum adsorption capacity reached 65.74 mg/g for Zn(II) at pH 5.7, 57.9 for Mn(II) at pH 6.2, from these values, the adsorption rate was almost constant. Hence, pH is an influential factor in the adsorption process since it leads to electrostatic changes between zinc and manganese and the surface of the ACCG composite. Furthermore, the zinc and manganese precipitation as Zn(OH) Since shaking, the consumed energy and the adsorption efficiency are important, determining the optimal speed to be used to remove heavy metals from aqueous solution is important. The effect of shaking speed on the adsorption capacity was studied by changing the value of this parameter in the range of 150–450 rpm for 1000 mg/l solutions of zinc and manganese and maintaining other parameters constant. At a shaking speed of less than 150 rpm, it was experimentally observed that some adsorbent particles remained at the end of the Erlenmeyer. As seen in Experiments were carried out to calculate empirical data of zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite as the function of qe (mg/g) vs. Ce (mg/l) in tested solutions. The non-linear two parameter isotherm models, containing Langmuir, Freundlich, Temkin and Dubinin–Radushkevich models were tested to compute model’s constants at four different temperatures (298, 319, 331 and 343 K). The obtained model’s constants, correlation coefficient (R According to the Temkin isotherm model similar to the Langmuir model suitably portrays the zinc and manganese adsorption, since the R Based on Dubinin–Radushkevich (D-R) model, the free energy (E) of zinc and manganese adsorption at four temperatures is in the range of 14.84–15.85 kj/mol and 9.62–13.36 kj/mol, respectively, indicating the chemical interaction was established between the zinc and manganese and the ACCG composite. Binary isotherm models are utilized to obtain the best-fit model and get adsorption mechanisms of zinc and manganese onto the ACCG composite. The calculated constants and error functions (MPSD, RMSE, and APE) of the isotherm models at temperatures of 298, 319, 331 and 343 K are presented in With respect to the amounts of error function, several binary isotherm models such as non-modified Langmuir, extended Freundlich and Sheindorf–Rebuhn–Sheintuch isotherm models had high error values, indicating that these models did not fit the empirical data points. Thus, these models stand out from discussions. Adsorption equilibrium data of zinc and manganese onto the ACCG composite were well fitted through using modified and extended Langmuir equations. However, the modified Langmuir demonstrated the best nonlinear regression fitting according to error function values (for Zn(II) MPSD < 0.053, RMSE < 1.78, APE < 5.66, and for Mn(II): MPSD < 0.063, RMSE < 2.07, APE < 6.18). Therefore, similar to single component, zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite in the binary component was also homogeneous. Given the values of Ki constant (it refers to the relationship between the ACCG composite and zinc and manganese in the binary components), at the temperatures from T = 298 K to 343 K. the ACCG composite as a novel adsorbent had a relatively better relationship with the zinc ion compared to the manganese ion. The calculated adsorption capacity (qe) for adsorption of zinc and manganese onto the ACCG composite was 65.4 and 53.8 mg/g, respectively. The values indicated that the adsorption capacity of the binary components is lower than the adsorption capacity in the single component. Similar results have been illustrated earlier for bentonite-alginate composite as adsorbent and lead and mercury as adsorbates [ The experimental data points of zinc and manganese adsorption got from isotherm models illustrated that the Langmuir model had properly fitting compared to the Freundlich model all over the adsorption time, suggesting that the adsorption of zinc and manganese onto the ACCG composite were uniform and single layer. In binary components, modified Langmuir fitted the adsorption process, implying the single layer adsorption onto the uniform ACCG composite surface with limited active adsorption sites. The adsorption capacities of the ACCG composite for zinc and manganese in the single testing solution were 77.68 and 64.29 mg/g, respectively reduced to 65.4 and 53.8 mg/g in binary testing solution. These results confirm that there is a kind of competition between the zinc and manganese ions for reaching to the surface of the activated sites of the ACCG composite. As indicated in The mechanism and rate-controlling step of the zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite adsorbent was determined through kinetic studies. The experimental tests were conducted using 1000 mg/l solutions of zinc and manganese in the batch system, revealing that the adsorption kinetic in the first minutes (up to 30 min) was fast and reduced afterward, although the adsorption values were different between zinc and manganese ions. The fitting of the linear regression of reaction-based and diffusion-based models were used in this study to determine different kinetic parameters. The rate-controlling step of zinc and manganese adsorption by the ACCG composite was investigated using reaction-based models such as pseudo-first order, pseudo-second order, and Elovich models ( In the pseudo-first order model, the R In the pseudo-second order model, the values of R According to Fitting of the Elovich and the pseudo-second order models on experimental data leads to invaluable information regarding the homogeneous surfaces of the ACCG composite. Adsorption of zinc and manganese ions by the ACCG composite was analyzed using the intra-particle diffusion model ( The value of K Thermodynamic parameters such as ΔH The values of ΔG The novel alginate-combusted coal gangue (ACCG) composite as a newly synthesized adsorbent was successfully prepared and characterized. This synthesized adsorbent was used for the removal of zinc and manganese from tested solution. The outcomes of XRF, XRD, IR, SEM and BET studies reported that the amount of carbon element and specific surface area increased by loading alginate onto the combusted coal gangue (CCG). Besides, the basal spacing (d The optimal conditions for adsorption of zinc and manganese onto the ACCG composite were initial zinc and manganese concentration = 1000 mg/l, the ACCG composite content = 7.5 g/l, contact time = 30 min, pH = 5, shaking speed = 350 rpm and temperature = 343 K. In the single component, the adsorption capacities of zinc and manganese onto the ACCG composite in equilibrium time were 77.68 and 64.29 mg/g, respectively. For both ions, the Langmuir and modified Langmuir models with high R The kinetics studies confirmed that the adsorption process could be fitted with a pseudo second-order model for both ions. Accordingly, the initial Zn(II) and Mn(II) concentration and the number of actived sites of surface of affected the adsorption process. In addition, the line fitting of experimental data of the intra-particle diffusion model passes through the origin of coordinates indicating the rate of the adsorption process for both ions has been controlled by the intra-particle diffusion step. Thermodynamic studies emphasized that the zinc and manganese adsorption onto the ACCG composite adsorbent was endothermic, dissociative, and spontaneous. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: