The paper describes the specific features of flow processes. The literature assumes that the separation criterion in flow processes is the diversification of settling velocities of particles in the separation medium. Nonetheless, it is very common to identify the realization of many flow processes with particle classification (sizing), i.e. separation according to the particle size, or cleaning (sorting), that is separation according to the particle density. The reason behind this, is the lack of a method for characterizing the particle populations according to the characteristic which is assumed as the separation criterion, here, the settling velocity of particles. The basic methods for characterizing the particle population and their relationship with partition curves have been described. The attention was drawn to the necessity of finding agreement between the real separation criterion and the method in which the particle population is characterized for the purpose of analysis and modelling of the flow processes. The characterisation method for particle populations has been proposed. The method is a combination of two basic particle population characterisation methods i.e. size analysis and sink and float test. The principle of the method is the calculation of the settling velocity of narrow particle size and density fractions in the separation medium and, next, arranging the separated size and density fractions according to the settling velocity. The above methodology was applied in characterizing two various coal slurries. The slurries were next separated in two various realizations of flow processes. One type of slurry was separated in the classifying and thickening HC-100 type hydrocyclone and the other one in HWO-300 type water-only cyclone. Prognoses were prepared, concerning the theoretical results of ideal separation (excluding the randomness of industrial processes) of both slurries according to the hitherto applied methods and according to the method, based on the distribution of settling velocity of particles. The results of prognoses were compared with the results of real separations. The method for characterising the particle population provides more complete and more accurate prognoses of the results of separation in hydrocyclones. One of the method's advantages is the conformity of the particle population characterisation method with real separation criterion in flow processes. The paper is concluded by a discussion of faults and uncertainties of the method for characterizing particle populations.According to some opinions ( Flow processes are used for classification of the mineral particle populations, their cleaning, dewatering as well as thickening and clarifying of slurries ( It is commonly assumed that the separation criterion in flow processes is the particle settling velocity in the separation medium. The diversification of settling velocities of the respective particles, in the first place, beside the technical conditions of the realisation of the process, decides the results of the separation ( Despite the fact that the diversification of the particle settling velocity has been recognised as the separation criterion in flow processes, it is still quite common to identify the realization of many flow processes with a purely size-based separation – classification (sizing) or with a separation according to the particle density – cleaning (sorting) ( The information on the distribution of the particle settling velocity is not, however, used in practice for analyzing and modelling the mineral particle separation in flow processes. This follows from the lack of a simple method for the measurement or determination of the settling velocity of the respective particles in the separation medium as well as the estimation of the distribution of the particle settling velocity in given population of particles. For these reasons, among other, for the analysis and prognoses of the separation results in flow processes simplifications are applied. They comprise in the mentioned above identification of the analysed process with the separation according to the particle size (classification – sizing processes) or particle density (cleaning – sorting processes), i.e. the size or density of the particles are recognized as the separation criteria in these processes. Speaking of a simple method, the authors mean such, which will not only enable to define the distribution of the particle settling velocities in the separation medium for the given population of particles, but also enable to define (determine) the distribution of the quality in any mineral particle population in the function of distribution of the particle settling velocities. For the characterisation of particle populations a function describing the distribution of the characteristic in question and employed for the material separation is used. Diversification of that characteristic is used for particle separation. This characteristic constitutes the separation criterion of the population of all the particles in the process. Various measurable characteristics are possible, according to which the mineral particle population can be characterized. This can be particle size, their density, hydrophobicity, magnetic susceptibility, and other physical, chemical etc. characteristic. The distribution can take the shape of a frequency function of distribution of the physical characteristic f(x), or integral function of distribution F(x), the so called distributive function ( In mineral engineering the so called partition curves – Tromp curves are used for the analysis and modelling of the separation processes ( The partition value for the given fraction is the ratio of the amount of the given fraction in one of the separation products to the amount of this fraction in feed to the separation process. Fraction is understood as a subset of particles with the values of the physical property (characteristic) in a defined narrow value interval. The set of partition values plotted in the function of physical characteristic taken as the separation criterion is the separation curve. From mathematical point of view the partition curve is a distribution function and determines the probability that a feed fraction with a defined property will enter one of the products. In practice the curve determines what part of the separated material, with defined physical properties taken as the separation criterion, will enter one or the other separation product ( Partition curve used in modelling should be closely related to the methods of characterisation of mineral particle populations. Information on the content of defined fractions (particle, density or other) in the separated material, translates through the partition curve on the prediction of the yield of the separation products. After the quality in fraction has been determined, also the results of the quality separation can be predicted. The basic and indispensable condition here for obtaining credible predictions of both of those values, and especially the results of the quality separation is the conformity of the characterisation of particle sets with the separation criterion for the given process. In case of the flow processes one should therefore determine the distribution of the settling velocity in the population of the separated particles. An attempt on relating the influence of the particle size and their density with the results of separation in flow processes can be found in literature ( The proposed method constitutes a combination of the two basic particle population characterisation methods, i.e. size analysis and sink and float test. The method, however, consists in arranging particles according to their settling velocities in the separation medium. Settling velocity of the respective particles is determined indirectly (calculated) on the basis of the distribution of the particle size and their density. The procedure of the proposed method for the characterisation of a particle population is as follows ( Performing size analysis of a particle population applying the sieving method and determining the content of the respective particle size fractions, Performing sink and float tests of the separated size fractions, in each case applying heavy liquids with the same densities (the authors propose to call the separated fractions “size and density fractions”) and determination of the content of the respective size and density fractions in the particle population, Calculation of average particle settling velocity for the size and density fractions using values characteristic for the size and density fraction particles, e.g. average density and average size, Arranging the size and density fractions according to the increasing or decreasing calculated settling velocities, tabulation or plotting the curve of the function of particle settling velocity distribution in the form of distributive function of the settling velocity of the particles in particle population F( Determination of the quality in size and density fractions (for example ash), as the basis for the estimation of quality separation. Such a curve is monotonously decreasing or increasing and has identical properties to the commonly applied size or relative density distribution curves. In the method presented above there exists a significant difficulty related to the determination of the settling velocity of the respective size and density fractions. The difficulty is the consequence of the changes in the value of the drag coefficient together with the change of the character of its movement ( Laminar movement (Stokes formula) Transitional movement (Allen formula) Turbulent movement (Rittinger formula) Terminal settling velocity, m/s Particle diameter, m Particle density, kg/m Liquid density (water), kg/m Dynamic viscosity of the liquid (water), Pa*s Gravitational acceleration, m/s The drag of the medium is the function of the Reynolds number which depends on the particle settling velocity. The Reynolds number values, at which the change in the character of the movement changes, are not obvious ( For all the separated size and density fractions, the average settling velocities should be calculated applying all three equations, From the three results each time the lowest should be selected and assigned to a relevant value of the size and density fraction content in the particle population. The application of such an approach enables to come near to the constant character of the real function which describes the particle movement in the settling medium. The method presented in One of the coal slurries, with nominal upper particle size class 1 Another coal slurry, with the nominal particle size below 4 In both cases the results of theoretical prognoses have been compared with experimental data. Separations of the slurries were conducted in laboratory conditions but using typical industrial hydrocyclones. The analyses were conducted on a laboratory testing stand constructed especially for hydrocyclone research, equipped with: Feed vessel with mixer – volume around 4 Pump system with pressure gauge and volume flow meter, Controlling system for the volume load of the hydrocyclone with feed, equipped using a set of valves and a bypass, System for simultaneous sampling of the feed and the separation products. The separation products and the excess feed were recirculated to the feed vessel during the tests. The basic technical and technological parameters which were taken for the tests are presented in   On the right side of the intervals marked on Similarly to the previous case the intervals of the settling velocity marked on The obtained real separation results confirm, that at a similar ash content in the overflow it is possible to obtain various ash contents in the underflow (for example in experiments 3, 5 and 6 or 1 and 2). The above separation results cannot be prognosed applying the washability curves. These curves closely relate the yield of the products with their quality. The higher the ash content in the product the higher is the overflow yield (clean coal concentrate) and lower underflow yield (reject). Comparison of the results in the experiments 1 and 2 or 3 and 4 contradicts such prognoses. In these cases the overflow yield is lower at high ash content than at low ash content (experiments 1 and 2) or the same ash content in the overflow corresponds to a definitively different mass yield of the product (experiments 3 and 4). A comparison of the above data leads to the conclusion that the prognosing method, using the particle settling velocity distribution enables to much more accurately prognose the results of coal slurry sorting in water only cyclone. The test results presented above, analysed both in the function of particle settling velocity distribution in the feed as well as in typical current approaches, applying the analysis of particle size or relative density distributions in the feed, indicate that a more complete prognosis of the quantity and quality separation in both of the cases is possible only when the first method for the characterisation of the separated particle populations is used. Hydrocyclones belong to a group of devices, for which prognosing the separation results is particularly difficult ( The particle population characterisation method presented above, beside undisputable advantages has also disadvantages and is characterised by a number of uncertainties. The main disadvantage of the method is that it is very labour-consuming. It follows from the need to conduct accurate particle size distribution characteristics, applying the wet sieving method. Next, quite detailed sink and float tests for the size fractions separated in the size analysis need to be conducted. The selection of the particle size fraction intervals in the size analysis and the separating heavy liquid densities in float and sink tests, as well as the accuracy with which they are conducted decide the correct characterisation of the particles according to their settling velocities. The presented method, beside the disadvantages presented above, has also a number of characteristic uncertainties. These are related to the precision of the analytic methods which comprise the subsequent stages of the analysis. In the methodology of determination of the distribution of the particle settling velocities the following actions can be listed: Sampling and preparing the samples for further analyses, Conducting the size analyses, Conducting float and sink tests, Calculation of the settling velocity of the average particle size and density fractions, Assigning the size and density fractions with the value of the particle settling velocity which is proper due to the character of the movement of the medium in which the particle settles. The uncertainty of the results of analyses of particle size and density distribution is minimised by conducting them according to the procedures of the established and published standards. The uncertainty following from the calculation stage and the stage of assigning the settling velocity values to the size and density fractions needs to be more accurately analysed. The uncertainties of the calculations of the particle settling velocity in separation medium are related to the assumption of defined particle settling conditions in real separation medium. In the frames of the works described here the conditions of free settling have been assumed. The distribution of the particle settling velocity is a definitively continuous function. The manner in which the proper settling velocity in the separation is assigned to the size and density fractions uses 3 various equations and is only an approximation of this continuity. This uncertainty follows from the number of separated size and density fractions and is related to the range of the particle fractions separated in the size analysis and the density fractions separated next in the float and sink tests. At this stage of the method the undoubtedly continuous functions of the particle size and density distributions are replaced by a distributive function of the average discrete values, since the average values of the size and average value of density of size and density fraction have been used for the calculation of the value of the settling velocity. The obtained settling velocities are also average for the given size and density fraction. The conducted calculations (  It is commonly assumed that the separation criterion in the flow processes is the diversification of the particle settling velocity in the separation medium. In practice for the analysis of their real realisations and prognosing the separation results other criteria than the particle settling velocity are taken. This results from the lack of a relatively simple method for determination of the distribution of the particle settling velocity in the separation medium. The proposed methods of characterisation of particle populations for flow processes is an indirect method and comprises the calculation of average particle (size and density fractions) settling velocities on the basis of the results of conducted size analysis and sink and float tests. The particle settling velocity curve, determined according to the proposed method has all the properties of other functions (distributive functions) commonly used for the characterisation of the particle populations. The conducted tests of classification of coal slurry in classifying and thickening hydrocyclone as well as coal slurry cleaning in a water only cyclone have shown that the above method allows a more accurate characterisation of the results of a quantitative an qualitative separation than those enabled by the currently applied methods. These methods are: the analysis of the particle size distribution when the separation in hydrocyclone is associated with the classification (sizing) of the feed particles and the analysis of the particle relative density distribution when the separation in the hydrocyclone is associated with cleaning (sorting). The results of separation in the classifying and thickening hydrocyclone as in water only cyclone, analysed using the analysis of the particle settling velocity distribution indicate that in both cases a separation typical for flow processes occurs. The difference consists in the fact that in the classifying and thickening hydrocyclones the separation is usually realised at low and very low values of the particle settling velocity in the separation medium, and in the water only cyclones at very high particle settling velocity values. The proposed method beside indisputable advantages has also some faults. The main fault of the method is its labour intensity related to the need to conduct quite detailed size analysis and float and sink tests. The method has also a number of uncertainties immanently related to the method of its realisation. One of the uncertainty sources of the method is the assumption of the conditions of free settling of particles during the calculation of their settling velocity in the separation medium. The proposed method for the characterisation of mineral particle populations, showing its advantages in case of the analysis of the separation processes in hydrocyclones can be applied in the analysis and modelling of other flow processes.