It has been suspected for some time that froth rheology has an impact on froth and flotation performance but little experimental work has been performed to investigate these effects. In this paper, the effect of froth rheology on froth and flotation performance was investigated by performing flotation tests in a 20 L continuous flotation cell using a synthetic ore which was a mixture of pure chalcopyrite and silica. Froth rheology was measured during these tests along with key flotation performance indicators: froth height above the lip, air recovery and silica recovery. It was found that froth rheology was positively correlated to froth height above the lip. Air recovery was also correlated to froth rheology; at low froth viscosity, air recovery increased upon increasing consistency index (a measure of the viscosity of a fluid) while the opposite was found at high froth viscosity. A similar correlation between froth viscosity and silica recovery was also observed.
                  Measurements of froth rheology were also performed in industrial scale flotation cells processing a platinum ore. The investigated industrial scale froth exhibited similar rheological characteristics to that observed in the laboratory work. Both of the froths have a shear-thinning nature with minor yield stress. Froth height above the lip was also found to be positively correlated with froth viscosity, which supports the conclusions drawn from the laboratory work.Froth flotation consists of pulp and froth phases. The function of the froth phase is to enhance the overall selectivity and recovery of the flotation process. The froth achieves these by reducing the recovery of entrained material to the concentrate stream, while preferentially retaining the attached material. This increases the concentrate grade whilst limiting as far as possible the reduction in recovery of valuables. The importance of the cleaning and recovering actions of the froth in flotation has been well recognised ( The froth efficiency which can be represented by the selectivity and recovery of the process is influenced by froth retention time. A greater froth retention time results in a greater probability of drainage of the water and entrained solids back from the froth phase to the pulp phase through the Plateau borders and vertices within the froth ( It is expected that froth rheology can influence froth and flotation performance through its effect on froth retention time. A more viscous froth resists motion towards the lip, increasing the time the froth remains in the flotation cell. Very little work has been performed to investigate the effect of froth rheology on froth and flotation performance other than the work of In previous work published by the authors, the effect of froth properties on froth rheology was investigated using the results of a Central Composite Rotatable Design (CCRD) test program ( At the end of this paper, a preliminary industrial study of froth rheology conducted in a platinum ore is described. The industrial result was used to validate some findings observed in the laboratory test work.  The 33 flotation tests were performed in a bottom driven 20 L flotation cell with cross sectional dimensions of 30 by 30 cm. The flotation feed was a mixture of pure chalcopyrite and silica. The chalcopyrite was purchased from Geo Discoveries as bulk rock. The silica was purchased from Sibelco Australia as fine particles (P80 = 73 µm). Before each flotation test, a measured quantity of the chalcopyrite was ground to the targeted particle size distribution, mixed with silica to achieve the desired feed grade, and diluted with Brisbane tap water in a conditioning tank. The volume of water added was that required to achieve 40 wt% solids in the feed to all the tests. Sodium ethyl xanthate (2.0 g/t) and Dowfroth 250 (14.7 ppm) were used as the collector and the frother, respectively. The flotation tests were operated continuously in a closed circuit by recycling the concentrate and tailing. A pictorial diagram of the experimental set-up is shown in After operating the system a sufficient period to achieve process stabilisation, froth rheology was measured, froth vision was recorded and metallurgical samples (feed, concentrate and tailing) were collected for assay (copper and silica). A ruler was then placed at the middle of the cell lip to measure the froth height above the lip as it discharged into the launder. The froth rheology measurement was conducted using a 6-blade vane (22 mm in diameter and 16 mm height) attached to an air-bearing rheometer (Anton Paar DSR301). A tube (74 mm in diameter and 150 mm height) was used to encircle the vane to eliminate the effect of the horizontal froth flow on the rheology measurement as previously discussed by the authors ( A digital video camera (Sony ACC-FV50B) was mounted above the flotation cell to record froth movement and the videos were analysed by a modified SmartFroth machine vision algorithm ( Rheology is the science related to the deformation and flow of matter. The rheological behaviour of a substance is often presented as a plot of the shear stress against the shear rate (the ‘flow curve’ or ‘rheogram’) measured by a rheometer. Various types of rheogram are illustrated in The froth produced in the test program has been shown to exhibit shear-thinning behaviour with a minor yield stress (i.e. pseudo-plastic in nature) ( The rheograms of apparent viscosity versus shear rate for all tests are plotted on a log-log scale as shown in Eq. Flotation performance typically refers to flotation recovery and concentrate grade. The former is determined by froth and pulp recoveries. The latter is affected by pulp and froth conditions as well as feed grade. Pulp and froth recoveries as well as feed grade all are changing significantly as the operating variables of the system are varied in the different tests. Therefore, it would be difficult to study the direct effect of froth rheology on concentrate grade and flotation recovery. Instead, this study investigated the effects of rheology on other key flotation performance indicators. Given that there are only liberated chalcopyrite and silica particles in the flotation system, upgrading in the froth is achieved by maximising the drainage of entrained silica. Hence, the recovery of silica will be a measure of entrainment recovery which is known to significantly affect the final concentrate grade. It was therefore decided to investigate the effect of froth rheology on silica recovery. The silica recovery was calculated based on the mass flow rates of silica in the concentrate and tailings. Froth recovery is an ideal indicator of froth performance. However, it is difficult to measure as mentioned previously. As the valuable minerals are recovered by attachment to bubble surfaces, air recovery is used as an indicator for froth recovery in this study. Air recovery was calculated using Eq. Froth height above the lip determines the froth transportation volume and consequently affects the froth transportation velocity, which influences the froth retention time. Hence, the froth height above the lip can indirectly affect the flotation performance. The froth height above the lip is expected to be determined by the froth properties as well as the flotation operating conditions. In a situation where a variable is being affected by multiple variables, regression analysis is the best method for determining whether an influencing parameter is of significance. The flotation operating condition which was changed in the test program and would be expected to affect froth height above the lip is superficial gas velocity. The greater the volume of gas moving through the transportation zone of a froth (i.e. that above the lip), the greater the tendency for the froth to rise before it overflows into the launder. The froth properties that are expected to affect froth height significantly are froth rheology and bubble burst rate ( As outlined in Section The resulting model is shown in Eq. Eq. The model presented above was not developed with the intention of predicting froth performance, but rather to investigate how various operational variables and the froth rheology affect the flotation performance. This is also the aim of the models presented in the following sections. Minitab 17 was used to calculate the significance of the linear, quadratic and interaction effects of each factor on the froth height above the lip, as shown in  When the froth does not exhibit a significant yield stress, like the froth in this study, the energy required to overcome the flow resistance is directly proportional to the froth viscosity. As the froth becomes more viscous, the energy required to overcome the flow resistance increases. As a result, the froth above the concentrate lip increases in height to the level at which the resistance to flow is overcome by the increased gravitational energy and the resulting kinetic energy of the froth discharge. This potentially provides more residence time in the froth for froth drainage but also more time for bubble coalescence which will affect air and silica recoveries. The extent to which this occurs will be evaluated in the following sections. Air recovery is expected to be correlated to the froth retention time above the lip and bubble burst rate. Froth retention time above the lip is expected to be affected by the superficial gas velocity, bubble burst rate and froth viscosity. Superficial gas velocity provides the driving force for froth movement, and consequently significantly influences froth retention time. In addition, the bubbles bursting at the froth surface drag neighbouring bubbles to fill their vacuum and, therefore, slow the froth velocity towards the lip and increase froth retention time. Froth viscosity is a measure of the resistance to froth flow which results in a greater froth height above the lip (as discussed in Section Based on the discussion above, air recovery in the flotation tests is expected to be a function of superficial gas velocity, froth rheology and bubble burst rate. In the absence of any bubble burst rate data, a regression model for air recovery was developed as a function of superficial gas velocity and the froth rheology. The data used for the regression of air recovery is summarised in The resulting model is given in Eq. Similar to Eq.   As demonstrated in previous work by the authors ( As discussed above, increasing froth viscosity is expected to increase froth retention times above the lip by resisting froth motion, while a decrease in bubble burst rate should enhance froth transportation and decrease froth retention time. These two effects oppose each other. The resulting froth performance (as measured by the air recovery) depends on which effect dominates the froth transportation process. Froth rheology has therefore been shown to significantly affect air recovery (which is expected to be closely related to froth recovery), and it is therefore speculated that froth rheology can also significantly affect froth recovery. It is recommended that this be verified when a reliable approach to measure froth recovery is developed in future. More importantly, a peak air recovery with consistency index is observed in Silica recovery is also expected to be affected by froth rheology because of its effect on froth retention time. In addition to froth rheology, other parameters that affect water recovery should also be taken into account to model silica recovery. It has been found previously that the amount of gangue entrained is proportional to the water recovery ( Silica recovery will be a function of the amount of silica entering the froth phase and the amount of silica draining back to the pulp. The former can be significantly influenced by superficial gas velocity as it has been experimentally found that superficial gas velocity affects the amount of water entering the froth zone ( Froth retention time determines the drainage of silica from the froth phase. Froth depth affects the froth retention time and the amount of water reporting to the concentrate ( Hence, a multi-regression analysis for silica recovery was performed as a function of the superficial gas velocity, the impeller speed, the froth depth and the froth rheology. The data used for the regression of silica recovery are shown in As a large number of terms were present in the response surface regression model, a stepwise procedure was used to remove the insignificant terms in the prediction of silica recovery. Stepwise regression is an approach to selecting a subset of effects for a regression model based on the significance of the coefficients for each term in the model. The F-criterion for entering a term in the model or removing a term from the model was set at 0.15. The resulting model is shown in Eq. As mentioned before, this is the conventional response surface model with linear, quadratic and cross-product terms generated to explore the effects of the variables on silica recovery. The standard error of the model is 5.11 while the experimental error calculated from the seven repeat tests is 3.15. Again, the prediction uncertainty of the model is much greater than the experimental error, which implies that the regression data is not fully sufficient to predict silica recovery and that some important variable(s) is probably missing. It is still expected that the important missing variable in the regression is bubble burst rate. The regression result might be improved with a high R2 if bubble burst rate were to be taken into account. The significant terms influencing silica recovery are shown in  Similar to the correlation between air recovery and consistency index shown in The opportunity was taken to carry out a preliminary study of froth rheology in a platinum plant in South Africa, using the same rheometer (Anton Paar DSR 301) which was used to perform the froth rheology measurement in the CCRD tests in the laboratory. The flotation circuit of the plant consisted of rougher, scavenger, primary cleaner and secondary cleaner sections. The measurements were performed in the third and fifth rougher cells and the first primary cleaner cell. The rheometer head was fixed on a holder which was attached to the handrail and the rheometer head was moved vertically to adjust the position of the vane in the froth, based on the froth height. The set-up of the rheometer is shown in During each froth rheology measurement in each flotation cell, four or five torque values were acquired at different vane speeds. The vane speed and torque values were converted to shear rate and shear stress using the method developed by the authors ( The following conclusions can be drawn from The platinum ore froth exhibited non-Newtonian flow characteristics similar to those observed in the laboratory work using the synthetic copper ore. The froth appeared to be shear-thinning with minimal yield stress, which is in agreement with the flow behaviour of the froth generated in the laboratory. The effect of froth rheology on the froth height above the lip followed the same trend as that found in the laboratory work. To compare the froth in the different cells on the basis of apparent viscosity, The effect of froth rheology on the froth cleaning action was not investigated in the industrial study, as the ore consisted mainly of complex clay minerals. The minerals attached to the bubble surfaces were dominated by various hydrophobic clay minerals (e.g. floatable talc) rather than the valuable minerals. Hence, the variation of froth rheology did not necessarily affect the upgrading of the valuable minerals. The effects of froth rheology on froth and flotation performance were studied in this work. The froth rheology was positively related to the froth height above the lip, which in turn was determined by the equilibrium of energy in the froth. The froth height above the lip provides the potential energy to overcome the flow resistance (i.e. froth viscosity) and the kinetic energy for froth flow. When the froth becomes more viscous, the froth height increases to generate more potential energy to overcome the resistance. The effects of froth rheology on air recovery and silica recovery were also investigated in this work. It was found that air recovery was significantly affected by froth rheology; at low froth viscosity, air recovery increased upon increasing consistency index while the opposite was found at high froth viscosity. As the valuable minerals are recovered by attachment to bubble surfaces, it is expected that froth rheology also has a significant impact on froth recovery. A similar correlation between froth viscosity and silica recovery was also observed. A preliminary industrial study of froth rheology was performed for a platinum ore. It was found that the froth exhibited similar rheological characteristics to the froth generated in the laboratory work using a synthetic copper ore. Both of the froths have a shear-thinning nature with minor yield stress. The industrial data supported the correlation between froth viscosity and the froth height above the lip observed from the laboratory work. The interactions between froth rheology and bubble burst rate in a froth phase are still poorly understood. It is recommended that the correlation between froth rheology and bubble burst rate be further investigated with a view to improving the understanding of the effect of froth rheology on froth and flotation performance. The authors would like to thank the