The improvement of photocatalytic properties of TiO2 was achieved by using water-mediated TiO2 decorated with graphene (WTiO2-d-graphene) composites. This work describes the photocatalytic degradation of trichloroethylene (TCE) in the presence of WTiO2-d-graphene composites. WTiO2-d-graphene composite photocatalysts, containing different amounts of graphene, were prepared by facile ultrasonic assisted techniques and thermal reaction. The surface properties of these WTiO2-d-graphene composites were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Peaks attributable to C–C (284.4 eV), denoted as the C1s spectrum, and C–O bonds (288.6 eV) appeared simultaneously in the XPS spectrum. It was inferred that this was due to the presence of Ti–O–C bonds. The photocatalytic properties were determined by monitoring the degradation of TCE in the headspace of the vial at different times using gas chromatography. From the results, it was apparent that the photocatalytic activities of WTiO2-d-graphene composites were higher than that of pure TiO2. This can be attributed to their ability to absorb light over a wider range of wavelengths.In recent years, issues such as environmental pollution arising from scientific developments and rapid industrial growth, abnormal climate caused by depleting water resources and global warming, increased water scarcity and unreliable underground water have already caused our country to be designated as a water-stressed country. The combined effect of the aforementioned problems is such that the situation cannot be resolved by natural water cycle replenishment A photocatalyst is a substance that generates electrons and holes when it absorbs energy greater than the bandgap energy, and decomposes contaminants when the hole reacts with the hydroxyl ion in water. Titanium dioxide (TiO TiO Recently, interest in graphene has increased due to its unique characteristics and its utility in several applications. There are several known synthetic methods for the manufacture of graphene The purpose of this study was to investigate the improvement in graphene-based TiO The TiO The change in the structure of each sample was examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Bruker D2 PHASER), while the morphology was checked using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi SU8010). Information on chemical bond energy was obtained using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, VG Scientific Co. ESCA LAB MK-II). The photocatalytic properties of each sample were investigated by monitoring the decomposition reaction of an aqueous solution of TCE (500 ppm, 99.99% purity, Sigma Aldrich) as the pollutant. After stirring the mixture of the WTiO  The photocatalytic properties of the WTiO During the initial stage of photolysis, electrons and positive holes are generated in light-irradiated TiO  From the results, it is apparent that the amount of degraded TCE follows the order TiO A facile synthesis of WTiO This subject is supported by