In this work the temperature evolution, in time and space, in two systems that consist of a single gold nanoparticle and an ensemble of gold nanoparticles, both embedded in a polystyrene sulfonic acid matrix, is numerically modeled. The heat accumulated by the gold nanoparticles is estimated considering the system irradiation with a nanosecond laser at 532nm. The distribution of the temperature in time and space is calculated by solving the heat diffusion equations with appropriate initial and boundary conditions. The rise of nanoparticle size determined the temperature increase of the gold nanoparticle and implicitly of the entire system but also the increase of the necessary time for reaching the thermal equilibrium of the system related to the surrounding polymer volume. The temperature evolution and the dynamics of the system towards reaching the thermal equilibrium are influenced by the gold nanoparticles distribution in the polymer matrix.An increased interest for gold nanoparticles has been recorded since 1990′s because of their potential applications to photo-chemistry, nonlinear optics, electronic devices and molecular recognition As can be seen this effect of AuNPs is developed in well determined volume systems. The heat generated by the AuNPs after laser irradiation is localized inside and near the particle and because of their reduced sizes it is difficult to be measured. Thus, the temperature is indirectly determined and can be done generally by mathematical modeling but also, experimentally. The different models proposed by the scientists differ as approach and simplifications. For example, Letfullin determined the particle temperature in terms of energy accumulation from the incident laser radiation and energy loss due to heat diffusion into the surrounding medium The most studied application related to the heat generated by the AuNPs after laser irradiation is the hyperthermia therapy of cancer. Thus, Y. Ren calculated the heat generated by laser irradiated media (tissue that contains AuNPs) using Monte Carlo method and Beer’s law. The heat generation was introduced as a volumetric heat source in Pennes bioheat equation. The influence of period heating, AuNPs volume fraction, laser irradiated area and tumor aspect ratio is tackled In case of the experimental methods, Gogorov used Raman spectroscopy to determine the temperature on the surface of ice embedded AuNPs. Also, they tried to determine the AuNP surface temperature using a polymer that binds to the AuNP and changes its size with the temperature increase As it can be seen the temperature control is vital in all the above-mentioned applications and can be done by changing the AuNP size and shape, the surrounding medium or the laser parameters − laser pulse wavelength, pulse energy and pulse duration Most mathematical models that study laser irradiated AuNPs take into account various NP sizes, temperature varying material parameters, a non-perfect contact between the AuNP and the surrounding medium. It is worth emphasizing that they do not address the issue of heat transfer in case of more than one AuNP and the influence of the various geometries in which the metallic nanoparticles exist in the surrounding matrix. Also, the problem of simulating a large (infinite) system is not tackled. The aim of our research is to evaluate the thermal effect caused by the interaction of the laser radiation with the gold nanoparticles by numerical modeling of the temperature evolution, in time and space, in two systems: i) a single AuNP embedded in a polymer matrix (System I), and ii) an ensemble of AuNPs embedded in a polymer matrix (System II). The second system is assumed to extend infinitely and therefore simulate a more realistic problem. Also, the influence of the AuNPs size and particles distribution inside the system as factors that influence the amount of heat generated is studied. Within this work two types of systems were studied. System I consists of a single gold nanoparticle embedded in polystyrene sulfonic acid matrix (PSS) as surrounding medium. System II consists of 100 gold nanoparticles embedded in the same polystyrene sulfonic acid matrix. In this system, by imposing periodic heat boundary conditions in both x and y directions, we are able to simulate heat diffusion in a medium which can be considered to extend infinitely in these directions. In both cases the simulations start from 293 The polymeric matrix properties (thermal conductivity, density and specific heat) were experimentally determined and the values were used as received. A photopyroelectric technique is used to detect the thermal diffusivity (α) and thermal effusivity (e), respectively. The static volume specific heat (C) and the thermal conductivity (k) are related to the other two parameters through the following relations: k To be able to simulate the AuNP and the surrounding medium temperature it was assumed that: the system is isolated, and in the AuNP the electron and lattice temperature are equalized due to the fast heat transfer from electrons to phonons. Thus, the nanoparticles are heated uniformly and the heat loss is due to heat conduction from the AuNP to the surrounding medium. It is also assumed that all the parameters that describe the system remain constant in the studied temperature range and the polymeric matrix is optically transparent to the laser light. The heat accumulated by the AuNP is estimated considering the system irradiation with a Nd:YAG laser at 532 Taking into account that the nanosecond laser irradiation of Au is responsible for the heat accumulated in the metal nanoparticle, the AuNPs were defined as heat sources. We assume that the nanoparticles heat uniformly (the heat does not have a radial distribution), and so the heat generated by the particles is calculated using the following equation: The heat transfer equation for our systems is described by equations The following initial conditions for both System I and System II were imposed: Also, we consider the following boundary conditions: System I: Exterior boundary: Boundary conditions on the particle surface: System II: Lower boundary: Upper boundary: Boundary conditions in The solution When AuNPs are irradiated with a nanosecond laser, a sharp and brief temperature increase is produced due to the local thermal effect For System I we performed three simulations using three nanoparticle diameters namely 20, 30 and 40 The surrounding matrix is a diluted aqueous polymer solution (18 Taking into account that the local thermal effect and implicitly the particle temperature after irradiation reaches the aforementioned limited value in case of the 40 The maximum intensity value for 40 Given that AuNP and its surrounding medium are modeled as two concentric spheres, the reference of the system is placed in the AuNP’s center. The total system radius (r-coordinate) incorporates the nanoparticle radius and the width of the surrounding polymer matrix. In these conditions, the behavior of different sizes of AuNP (20 From the simulations that were carried out it was observed that AuNP’s temperature is dependent on the time considered from the beginning of the excitation process, but also increases with the increase of the nanoparticle diameter ( As shown in The temperature of the polymer matrix increases also with the increase of the AuNP diameter, reaching a maximum temperature in the proximity of the nanoparticle ( As we mentioned before, our considered systems containing the gold nanoparticle and the surrounding matrix have a constant volume. The differences between them are coming from the diameter of the central particle and the thickness of the polymer matrix. When the diameter of the AuNP increases, the volume of the polymer matrix decreases. Both the necessary time to reach the thermal equilibrium and the heated polymer matrix volume are influenced by the AuNP size, the temperature decay being faster in the case of the 20 In Due to this temperature rise and to the fact that the required volume to retrieve the temperature rise is decreasing with the AuNP diameter increase, the temperature in the polymer matrix increases with 23.38 and 55.54°, respectively, when the particle diameter increases. The increase of the time required to reach the thermal equilibrium in the heated polymer matrix volume may be explained by the lower volume in which the heat diffuses and implicitly the lower number of the species involved in the heat diffusion, both aspects amplifying the thermal agitation. As it has already mentioned, beside the size of the AuNP, the distribution of the metallic nanoparticles can also influence the temperature of the system. The second system (System II) studied in this work consists of four simulations that take into account a cuboid polymer matrix (length and width of 200 Besides the random distribution, the other three geometries have in the z direction four equally spaced layers of AuNPs (the first layer is situated at the bottom of the cuboid), distributed in the xy plane in In case of the The The In these conditions, the temperature distribution of different AuNP geometries and their surrounding matrix were determined using an intensity of 3.95 Thus, it can be observed from In each geometry, at the point where the maximum temperature is reached, a line that crosses the system in the z direction and a zx plane is drawn. Thus, the temperature variation with z and x coordinates is studied at different moments of time ( As can be seen in The As discussed above, if the two systems are compared, it can be seen that there is a significant difference in temperature between a 20 In this paper, we calculated the temperature distribution, in time and space, in two laser irradiated systems consisting of one single AuNP, embedded in a polymer matrix and an ensemble of AuNPs, embedded in a polymer matrix, respectively. The distribution of the temperature in time and space was calculated by solving the heat diffusion equations with appropriate initial and boundary conditions, knowing that AuNPs accumulate energy when interacting with visible light. Mathematical modeling is the most appropriate tool to determine the temperature inside of such systems, due to the small size of the considered metallic nanoparticles. The temperature of AuNP and implicitly of the entire system increases when the nanoparticle diameter rises. The rise of nanoparticle size also determines an increase of the necessary time for reaching the thermal equilibrium of the system, correlated with the decrease of the surrounding polymer volume. The different distribution of the AuNPs in the polymer matrix plays a significant role in the temperature distribution and in the dynamics of the system towards reaching thermal equilibrium. The more agglomerated the AuNPs are the higher the temperature near that area and the longer the time to reach the thermal equilibrium. The modeled thermal behavior of the laser irradiated AuNPs provides crucial information about the temperature distribution control regarding applications in metallic micro- and nanofabrication process by direct laser writing but also for material growth, cancer treatment and controlled drug release. This work was supported by the grants of