Boreholes are drilled for different purposes such as discovering potential new deposits of underground minerals, extraction of petroleum, underground strata investigation, etc. Although no specific significant problems have been reported on drilling through hard rocks and strong formations, considerable problems have been observed in areas consisting of a sandy formation where particles are not strongly cemented by natural cement agents such as clay, iron oxide or calcite. In this study, a series of the thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) laboratory tests was conducted on synthetic poorly cemented sand specimens in which the applied stresses were at levels of generating breakout on the borehole wall. Five different stress paths were designed and applied to the specimens to investigate the effect of stress paths on the borehole failure. Two borehole diameter sizes (10mm and 20mm) and three different cement contents (6%, 7% and 8%) were considered to evaluate the effect of the borehole size and grain bonding strength on the borehole failure in poorly cemented sandy formations. The results showed that in these weak formations the confining pressure has a more significant effect on the instability of the borehole than the cement agent content. It was found that for any stress path the effect of the supporting stress on 
                        
                           
                              ε
                           
                           
                              1
                           
                        
                      was more significant for 10mm borehole sizes. In addition, based on the applied stress paths a new failure quadrilateral was determined for poorly cemented sands. Results showed that with increasing the cement content, similar quadrilaterals with almost parallel sides will be established. These outcomes can contribute to improving the design of the supporting systems and can be utilised to predict the borehole instability prior to drilling.thick-walled hollow cylinder. cement to sand grains weight ratio. tangential stress (MPa). vertical stress (MPa). mean grain diameter (mm). uniaxial compressive strength (MPa). confining stress (MPa). angle of internal friction (degrees). normal stress (MPa). intermediate principal stress (MPa). diameter of TWHC specimen (mm). perimeter of TWHC specimen (mm). Drilling a borehole into the earth crust and removing the underground geomaterials cause stress concentration around the borehole. After the borehole is drilled, tangential stress will be induced on the borehole wall based on the magnitude of the in situ stresses, while the radial stress will tend to zero if there is no supporting pressure acting inside the borehole. The magnitude of stresses depends on the borehole trajectory, value and orientation of in situ stresses and mud pressure inside the borehole (  It has been estimated that about 70% of the world's oil and gas reserves are found within this category of weakly-consolidated or non-consolidated strata ( Laboratory tests are one of the best approaches for studying the borehole stability in both hard and weak rocks. The thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) test is a common approach for simulating stress and strain states around a borehole in order to investigate the failure mechanism of an underground formation under different stress paths through independent internal and external pressures, and transference of the external boundary to an infinite distance. The main purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of different stress regimes on the failure of boreholes in poorly cemented sandy formations. In the current research, a number of TWHC laboratory tests were designed and performed under controlled laboratory conditions. Various stress paths were designed based on both far-field and an element on the borehole wall, and the results were compared for different stress paths. The borehole behaviour was monitored by a real-time video camera recording in order to determine the borehole failure along with measuring the stresses and strains for poorly cemented sand specimens. The outcome of this paper presents a more realistic understanding of the actual failure behaviour of poorly cemented sandy formations under different stress paths. Borehole instability and consequent stuck-pipe issues were reported at a drilling site located near Burra, South Australia. At this site boreholes were drilled with a purpose to discover mineral deposits for potential new mines. According to the in situ geological tests, borehole failures took place in a poorly cemented sandy layer. Conventional dry drilling methods, including air core and reverse circulation (RC) drilling, were used to drill the boreholes. Subsurface investigations of sediments showed that the layers above the bedrock are not homogeneous, the shallower layers of the sediment are composed of silt and fine sand, the deeper layers of the sediments change to dark grey plastic clay, and the problematic poorly cemented sandstone comes after this clayey layer. The drilled boreholes were generally 25–30 Samples were collected from each metre of the unconsolidated sandy layer and subsequently solid and TWHC specimens were prepared for laboratory tests based on the size and geometry of sand particles collected from the site. Geochemistry tests showed that the formation consists of quartz sand grains with a weak cementation interface of iron dioxide, clay and calcite as cementing agents. The yellowish-grey grains were mostly fine and sub-angular with random orientations. In the cylindrical coordinate system, the stress states at a borehole wall comprise tangential, radial and vertical stresses. These stresses are induced due to the presence of in situ stresses and can be calculated using different equations such as Kirsch equations based on the theory of elasticity ( In different studies, stress-strain diagrams have been used to present the mechanical behavior of TWHC specimens. Although the “engineering” stresses can be calculated based on the initial cross section of the specimens and can be easily obtained from the test results, in the current study the “true” stresses were considered for deriving the precise stress-strain diagrams. In this approach, the actual diameter of the specimen in each step of the test was considered for calculating the stress as follows; Specimen preparation is one the most important stages of the test to simulate the actual behaviour of poorly cemented sands, which are present at the drilling site. Most of the samples collected from the drilling site consisted of fine and sub-angular sand grains with random orientations. The specimens were prepared in the laboratory and their grading size and fabric closely resembled those of the poorly cemented sands in top 200 The dental paste was used for levelling the ends of specimens. Since this material is a very fine powder, it can fill in the voids even better than gypsum (water-dissolved). Also, the compressive strength of the dental paste is higher than that of gypsum. According to the initial results, using dental paste helped to obtain reproducible results and reduce the bedding error to its minimal value unlike in the tests for the specimens without dental paste at both ends. Sieve analysis was conducted based on the calibrated ASTM C-136 sieves. The chemical analysis of the grains showed that the formation comprises of quartz grains ( The optimum water ratio for cement-sand mixture was derived by using the standard Proctor test compactor hammer; with the energy of 0.55 Different curing time applications can be found in previous studies ( Portland cement has been suggested as a suitable substitute for the natural cement agents for making cemented-sand specimens in different studies ( A wide range of specimens with different amounts of The moulds were designed to include two different inner dowels with 10 To investigate the effect of stress paths on the behaviour of TWHC, five different stress paths ( Two approaches were used for analysing the stress paths; 1-considering the stresses on the boundary of the specimens, 2-considering certain stresses at the borehole wall. In the first approach (the first and second stress paths) the axial stress ( In the first stress path ( In the third and fourth stress paths, In the fifth path,  Laboratory tests were conducted on TWHC synthetic specimens to investigate the failure behaviour of poorly cemented sands near a drilled borehole under different stress paths. Video recording by an installed camera was employed to identify the instance of the borehole failure onset and to locate the damaged zone at the borehole wall. As mentioned in The unconfined compressive strength (UCS) tests using foil strain gauges and the external strain gauge for measuring the strains were conducted on TWHC specimens ( As mentioned in The specimens showed a more ductile behaviour when The stiffness in the initial stage of the tests (almost linear part) was similar in both stress paths, which shows the homogeneity of the specimens in vertical and lateral directions in the first and second stress paths respectively. With increasing the cement content, the stiffness of the specimens in the vertical direction obtained higher values than in the lateral orientation for the second path. However, the rate of increase in stiffness was lower for the second path. Increasing the Borehole failure was observed in the strain-hardening section of the stress-strain diagram when the tangential stress was the maximum principal stress (  Unlike for the The lateral strains were measured during the tests on TWHC specimens to study the effect of stress and cement content on the volumetric strain. The volumetric strain versus the strain in the direction of the maximum principal stress is plotted in  As mentioned in According to   As mentioned in the last section, after the elastic phase on the stress-strain diagram, the specimens exhibited strain-hardening behaviour. Thus, for axial stresses of greater than 2 To investigate the effect of the borehole size, tests were conducted also on TWHC specimens with 20  The scale effect for the first path (i.e. normal faulting) was already presented in  The trend of the stress-strain relationships in the fourth path was similar to ones in the first path where the axial stress was much lower than that for the fourth path in the initial stage of the test. To compare the results for the third and fourth stress paths the deviatoric stresses were plotted versus the strain in the orientation of the maximum principal stress, which is in lateral and axial directions respectively, and for different cement contents were calculated and are superimposed in In the fifth stress path, the TWHC specimens were subjected to  It is worth to mention that for the first and second stress paths where the confining pressure and axial stress were increased simultaneously, in the lateral pressures higher than 4.5  Based on the conducted tests on the TWHC specimens under different stress paths, a failure stress quadrilateral was developed for estimating another stress status that causes borehole instability in poorly cemented sands. As mentioned in In addition, the non-right slope of lateral sides of the developed failure stress quadrilaterals indicates the effect of the support pressure, which can enhance the stability of a borehole. For instance, point B at the borehole wall can undergo the maximum of Therefore, in the range of considered Five different stress paths including normal and strike-slip faulting stress regimes were designed and applied to synthetic TWHC poorly cemented sand specimens. Three different cement contents were investigated. Two approaches were considered for applying the stresses to the specimens including the far-field stresses (first and second paths) and an element at the borehole wall (third, fourth and fifth paths). The The effect of the cement content on the borehole stability was more pronounced than the effect of the change in the axial stress ( In the first path where With an increase in Considering an element inside the borehole when When Comparison between the third and fourth stress paths suggested that the supporting effect of the axial stress was more remarkable than the effect of the lateral pressure and the specimens could tolerate higher tangential stresses before failure. At more than 1.3% of axial strain in the axial direction, a horizontal localised zone was observed at the borehole wall by the camera, unlike in the case of the third stress path where The results showed that with an increase in Increasing the cement content by a small amount, otherwise keeping the same sample preparation and test conditions, significantly increases the stiffness of the specimens when A new failure domain was determined based on the considered stress paths for poorly cemented sands. Three different similar quadrilaterals, with almost parallel sides for three different This work has been supported by the Deep Exploration Technologies Cooperative Research Centre whose activities are funded by the The authors also would like to acknowledge Mr. Ian Cates and Mr. Simon Golding for all their help during the experimental work.