The performance of 2-[tris(hyroxycarbamoyl)methyl] carboxylic acids on flotation separation of diaspore over kaolinite and illite was investigated by using flotation tests, and their collecting performance was clarified by using density functional theory (DFT) calculation and molecular dynamics (MD) simulation. The flotation results of single minerals indicate that by using THDA, THCA or THTA as collector under neutral condition, diaspore presents good flotability while kaolinite and illite exhibit poor flotabilities. Among the three collectors, THCA displays the greatest difference in the flotability between diaspore and aluminosilicate. The flotation results of the artificially mixed minerals show that under the condition of pH 7 and 2×10−4
                     mol/L THCA, the A/S value in the concentrate is greatly increased and the separation of diaspore over aluminosilicates is feasible by using THCA as collector. DFT calculations show that large negative charges are located at the O and N atoms in the polar group of these collectors and the O atoms have more negative charges than N atoms. By comparison THCA has the highest HOMO energy, resulting in the highest collecting efficiency. The adsorption of collector on mineral surface by MD method indicates that the combination processes of collectors with mineral crystal are exothermic, and THCA has the greatest difference in binding energy between diaspore and aluminosilicate. A good correlation was found between the theoretical calculations and the experimental results. As a whole, THCA is a better collector to float and separate diaspore over aluminosilicates.mass ratio of Al 2-[tris(hyroxycarbamoyl)methyl] decanoic acid 2-[tris(hyroxycarbamoyl)methyl] dodecanoic acid 2-[tris(hyroxycarbamoyl)methyl] tetradecanoic acid density functional theory molecular dynamics mixed diaspore and kaolinite mixed diaspore and illite the highest occupied molecular orbital energy (a.u.) the lowest occupied molecular orbital energy (a.u.) interaction energies (kcal/mol) binding energies (kcal/mol) Bauxite resource in China is mainly diasporic type Collector is the crucial technology in the flotation process, and success of the separation process mainly depends on the selective adsorption of the collector on the objective mineral. In our previous work, a kind of chelating reagents containing mono-carboxyl and mono-hydroxycarbamoyl A selective adsorption of the collector can be achieved through an understanding of the properties of the mineral surface and the collector. As widely considered, computational methods are valuable tools for understanding the chemical systems. Although density functional theory (DFT) offered an effective tool in the calculation of some properties and performance of various collectors The 2-[tris(hyroxycarbamoyl)methyl] carboxylic acids were synthesized in our laboratory and their structure is shown in Single minerals including diaspore, kaolinite and illite were collected from Henan province in China. All the minerals samples were handpicked and ground in porcelain mill for 1 Artificially mixed minerals were prepared by mixing diaspore and kaolinite or illite at the mass ratio of 6 referring to the mass contents of these minerals in the real diasporic bauxite ores. The A/S of mixed diaspore and kaolinite (MDK) was 11.56, and the A/S of mixed diaspore and illite (MDI) was 11.05. Solutions of hydrochloride acid and sodium hydroxide were used to adjust the pH of the system, and distilled water was used in all tests. Flotation tests were performed in flotation machine (Liyuan, XFG-35, China) with the effective cell volume of 35 All molecular geometries were fully optimized by DFT at the B3LYP/6-31 In order to investigate the most suitable adsorption modes, MD simulation studies were performed using Materials Studio 4.4 software from Accelrys Inc. (USA). The models were built with Visualizer module; molecular dynamics (MD) and energy minimization (EM) calculations were performed on Discover module Binding energy Flotation tests on single minerals were carried out as a function of pH and collector concentration, using THDA, THCA and THTA as collector, respectively. The results are shown in  At pH 7, the flotability of diaspore, kaolinite and illite increases with increase of collector concentration as shown in The results of single mineral flotation tests present that THCA perhaps has excellent separation ability of diaspore over kaolinite and illite at pH 7. We adopted two kinds of artificially mixed mineral samples (MDK and MDI) to further investigate the performance of THCA. The flotation results are presented in The optimized collector geometries with the numbering schema at B3LYP/6-31 The collecting efficiency of a collector may be related to certain quantum-chemical parameters. Frontier molecular orbitals (HOMO and LUMO) were found to be extremely useful in explaining chemical reactivity. The HOMO is generally associated with the capacity of a molecule to donate electrons and determined the spatial distribution of valence electrons mostly producing chemical bonds, and thus electrophilic attacks can be correlated well with atomic sites having high density of the HOMO orbital. As the synthetic compounds act as electron donor species, the HOMO orbitals were especially taken into account in this study. The HOMO energies ( The chelating ability of a molecule depends on the electronic charge on the chelating atoms, which is also a fundamental concept for understanding the chemical reactivity. The collector with more electronic charges of the chelating atoms easily donates electrons to form chemical bonds with the mineral. The atomic charge values were obtained by the natural NBO population analysis. From the atomic charge values listed in The molecular dynamics simulations were performed to study the adsorption mode of collector (THDA, THCA or THTA) on mineral surface. After the studied system approached an equilibrium (both of the temperature and energy of the system reach balance), the results of the MD simulation were analyzed.  The values of the interaction energy and the binding energy of the three collectors on diaspore (0 Comparing the binding energies of the same mineral surface with different collector molecules, it could be found that for the (0 For the (0 Comparing the difference of the binding energies of the three collector molecules between the diaspore surface and the aluminosilicate surface, it could be found that, for the differences of The flotation results of single minerals indicate that diaspore presents good flotability while kaolinite and illite exhibit poor flotabilities by using THDA, THCA and THTA as collector, respectively. Among the three collectors, THCA displays the greatest difference in the flotability between diaspore and aluminosilicates. Additionally, the flotation results of the artificially mixed minerals show that the A/S values in the concentrate are greatly increased with 2 Calculated parameters of THDA, THCA and THTA such as the O and N atomic charges and the energies of HOMO and LUMO are related to their reactive behaviors. The results of DFT calculation indicate that the O atoms have more negative charges than N atoms in the polar group of the three collectors and THCA has higher HOMO energy than THTA and THDA. These collectors more easily form the chelate ring stable complex on the diaspore surface than on the aluminosilicates surfaces. The results of MD simulation show that the sequence of binding energy of each collector with different mineral surfaces is as follows: diaspore The theoretically obtained results are quite consistent with the flotation tests. Both flotation tests and theoretical calculations indicate that THCA is a commendable collector for flotation and separation of diaspore over aluminosilicates. The research was supported by a grant from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (20876180), for which the authors wish to express our great appreciation.