Dimeric and oligomeric Al and Zn-containing isobutyl silsesquioxanes (POSS) were studied to investigate their thermal stability both in inert and oxidant atmosphere, by means of Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analyses (TGA).
                  Thermo-oxidative degradation leads to an important solid residue yield, as a consequence of the POSS oxidation to a thermally stable ceramic phase.
                  The study of the differences in degradation pathways of both metal POSS derivatives clearly shows a competition between two possible mechanisms for product thermal behaviour, namely evaporation and oxidation.
                  The metal POSS compounds were incorporated via melt blending into a PP matrix and the composites thermal properties were studied by thermogravimetric analyses.
                  Thermo-oxidative degradation of composites is strongly affected by the presence of metal containing POSS, resulting in an improved thermal stability, in terms of higher weight loss temperature.Because of the recent general interest in hybrid organic–inorganic materials, many routes have been developed to prepare organic polymer based materials, incorporating inorganic building blocks on a nanoscale A great variety of inorganic and hybrid building blocks are nowadays available Particular interest has arisen from metal containing polymers, in which the metal is either incorporated into the polymer backbone by coordination interactions or dispersed as inorganic clusters The second approach seems to be the most promising and it has been developed for many transition metals, even if the problem of phase separation between organic polymer and inorganic particles has to be taken into account. Different techniques have been developed to avoid this problem, from encapsulation in polymer shell to in situ particle growth, but the most established method is cluster surface modification with polymer-compatible or reactive groups Various organically modified transition metal oxide clusters, such as heterotungstates, tin oxide, oxotitanium and oxizirconium clusters, have been successfully prepared and polymerised with acrylic and methacrylic monomers (MA, MMA, EMA), improving the thermal stability of PMA and PMMA reducing or inhibiting the typical polymer degradation via depolymerisation The effect of metal ethylhexanoate on cellulose thermal degradation was studied The effect of metal nanoclusters on thermo-oxidative degradation and flammability of PP was studied by Antonov et al. A very interesting possibility to incorporate metal functionalities into polymer is to use metal containing polyhedral silsesquioxanes (POSS) Synthetic methods for POSS metal derivatives are reported by Feher and Budzichowski From the middle of the 1990s, POSS metal derivatives were recognised as a model to study silica based catalysts and they soon found a number of applications, thanks to their versatility. Metal POSS has now application in both homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, as in alkene polymerisation, alkene methathesis and alkene epoxidation In the earlier years, a variety of POSS-based hybrid materials were successfully prepared via copolymerisation or grafting, using both thermoplastics, such as styryl-based polymers On the basis of this background, in this paper the authors investigate thermal and thermo-oxidative degradation of PP based composites, using different metal containing POSS. Octaisobutyl-T Metal POSS derivatives (Al and Zn) were prepared by deprotonation of incompletely condensed POSS trisilanol, ( To a solution of 20.0 Al-POSS structure was already reported by Feher et al. To a solution of 20.0 Composites were prepared mixing PP and POSS in a Brabender internal mixer (180 PP was a Moplen HP501L from Basell. POSS was loaded into the polymeric matrix at different weight ratios, from 3 wt.-% to 10 wt.-%. Thermogravimetry (TGA) was performed on a TA Q500 instrument, in platinum pans, with gas flows of 60 Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) analyses were run using a TA Q1000 instrument; measurements were done in sealed aluminium pans, under a nitrogen flow (50 To understand the role of POSS in the thermal degradation of POSS-based nanocomposites, the knowledge of the thermal behaviour of neat POSS is required.  Such behaviour on heating indicates evaporation of Al-POSS, as was previously observed to take place above melting temperature for T The reason for the weight loss temperature delay in Al-POSS with respect to T As expected for an oligomeric POSS compound that resists evaporation, the thermal degradation of Zn-POSS is completely different from that of T The amount of residue is slightly lower than the amount of the inorganic fraction in Zn-POSS (56%). This fact suggests that the thermal decomposition to volatiles of the isobutyl side chains and the reorganisation of POSS in a thermally stable inorganic/carbonaceous phase (possibly catalyzed by Zn ions) are strongly predominant over the scission/evaporation process. In air, the thermal behaviours of the examined POSS are considerably different with respect to those observed in inert atmosphere, because of the chemical interaction with oxygen. T Al-POSS shows a low weight loss rate, in a temperature range from 250 to 500 The weight loss curve of Zn-POSS in air ( Thermo-oxidative degradation of metal POSS was shown above to produce a ceramic thermally stable phase. This potentiality is very encouraging when aiming to obtain nanocomposites with good thermal and fire retardancy properties; in fact, such ceramic layer could be a good thermal barrier when generated on the surface during the polymer combustion process. In order to explore this field, PP based composites were prepared by melt blending with the metal POSS compounds at different wt.-% loadings. TGA curves in nitrogen atmosphere did not show significant changes in thermal properties with respect to neat PP, while thermo-oxidative tests performed in air showed a strong effect of metal POSS compounds on degradation pathways. At 3 wt.-% loading, composites show some relevant changes in TGA curves in air ( The residue at the end of the analysis is about 1.5% of the initial weight, which is consistent with the amount of POSS inorganic fraction (∼0.5) contained in the composites. A similar behaviour is observed with Zn-POSS containing PP. Increasing the POSS amount up to 10 wt.-%, the effects evidenced so far are much increased. Both in the case of Al-POSS and Zn-POSS ( It is supposed that the first of these steps corresponds to the degradation of neat PP on the sample surface; during this first stage, PP macromolecules are degraded into volatile oligomers by the well-known fragmentation process A first simple model to explain the second weight loss step involves the degradation of the residue formed during the first step. The oxidation of the sample surface determines the accumulation of POSS on the surface, with formation of a thermally stable phase, similar to the one previously observed on neat POSS heating. This ceramic superficial layer probably acts as a physical barrier, limiting the gas transport at the interface, thus influencing the kinetics of the degradation reactions. The proposed mechanism for such a barrier is based on three main steps: limiting the heat flux to the sample, reducing oxygen diffusion towards the bulk material and hindering the exit of the volatile degradation gases from the sample. A second possible explanation for the increase in weight loss temperatures is the formation of a more thermally stable phase, arising from a chemical mechanism induced, in a catalytic way, by the presence of metal functionalities. As Lewis acidic metals are known to catalyse oxidative dehydrogenation reactions in gas phase Thermal stability of dimeric [( In inert atmosphere, dimeric Al-POSS shows complete evaporation for temperatures below 350 In air, the interaction with oxygen leads to more complex degradation mechanisms, involving POSS organic fraction oxidation phenomena, in competition with the processes already observed in nitrogen atmosphere. The incorporation of metal containing POSS strongly improves the thermo-oxidative stability of PP, as shown by retarded maximum weight loss rate temperature, with delays ranging from 50 to 60 These results are encouraging in studying the metal POSS influence on thermal degradation and combustion behaviour of other polymer types.