The only organic compounds that have been detected in the Martian soil are simple chlorinated compounds released from heated surface material. However, the sources of the organic carbon are in dispute. Wind abraded silicates, which are widespread on the Martian surface, can sequester atmospheric methane which generates methylated silicates and thus could provide a mechanism for accumulation of reduced carbon in the surface soil. In this study we show that thermal volatilization of methylated silicates in the presence of perchlorate leads to the production of chlorinated methane. Thus, methylated silicates could be a source of the organic carbon released as chlorinated methane upon thermal volatilization of Martian soil samples. Further, our experiments show that the ratio of the different chlorinated compounds produced is dependent on the mass ratio of perchlorate to organic carbon in the soil.The search for organic compounds with special focus on biosignatures is one of the main motivations for missions to Mars. These investigations have targeted both the Martian atmosphere and soil The Viking, the Phoenix and the Curiosity spacecrafts analyzed Martian surface material for the presence of organic compounds by heating the samples (i.e. thermal volatilization) and examining the evolved gases by mass spectrometry (MS). This approach is challenged by the high concentration of perchlorate (ClO Several sources of reduced carbon in the Martian soil and CH In the present study we have performed laboratory experiments to investigate whether methylated silicates produced by sequestration of atmospheric CH The production of Cl A methylated quartz sample was prepared by sieving commercially available quartz (Merck, 1.07536 Lot no. TA1845136 424) to a particle size of 125–1000 μm. The sieved sample was washed and sonicated to remove attached smaller particles before drying. Then, the material was divided into ten gram aliquots using a Fritsch Rotary Cone Sample Divider to ensure equal size distributions. Finally, a ten gram subsample was transferred to a 20 cm long Simax glass ampoule connected to a valve (205 ml total volume). The ampoule was evacuated to <0.1 mbar and Post tumbling, the ampoules were opened and subsamples were transferred to glass flasks. Defined but different amounts of solid KClO The gases that evolved from the samples were analyzed by splitless injection of the gas-phase from the flasks on a Shimadzu GCMS-QP2010S with a Varian FS PORAPLOT-Q 25 m capillary column. Helium was used as carrier gas with a linear velocity of 61.6 cm/s. When analyzing the products of thermal volatilization of the methylated quartz sample 1 ml of the gas was injected and a purge flow of 5 ml/min was used. When analyzing the methylated olivine samples 0.1 ml of gas was injected and a purge flow of 1 ml/min was used. The injection port was kept at 105 °C and the oven temperature was initially 40 °C. After 5 min the oven temperature was increased by 5 °C/min until a final temperature of 200 °C was reached. The interface was kept at 150 °C and the ion source at 200 °C. The mass spectra were recorded for a full scan for m/z 10 to 120 and SIM channels for each m/z of 13–18, 28–37, 47–53, 61–62, 77–78, 83–89, 118–122 and 152 for the methylated quartz samples and each m/z of 12–18, 28–37, 47–53, 44–45, 82–89 and 117–122 for the methylated olivine samples. Data collection proceeded for 120 min. However, no peaks were detected after 41.0 minutes, which corresponds to the retention time of Cl The solid-state Thermal volatilization GCMS analysis of 500 mg of methylated quartz (≡Si– For a quantitative examination of the thermal volatilization products we heated the methylated olivine with different amounts of perchlorate added. During abrasion of the olivine sample we saw a decrease in the CH In the absence of KClO The ratio between the identified Cl The origin of the Cl It could be possible to infer likely sources of reduced carbon in the soil as well as the initial concentrations by investigating the qualitative and quantitative relationship between the carbon compounds produced by thermal volatilization of possible sources of reduced carbon in the Martian soil in combination with perchlorate salts. Such studies, however, would have to be based on a range of assumptions and deal with an array of variables. As an example, we have estimated the amount of organic carbon in the fine-grained surface material of the Rocknest samples based on our small dataset by two approaches. The first approach was to calculate the ratio of organic carbon to ClO The ratio of the Cl The Viking Lander 2 detected Cl Our estimates of the concentration of organic carbon in the Viking Lander 1 sample and the Rocknest samples should be taken with reservations for the possible effects of the discrepancies between the mode of operation of the Viking Landers instrument ( In summary, we have shown that thermal volatilization of KClO After this paper was submitted We thank Jørgen Skibsted and Hans J. Jakobsen for making the NMR analyses, Jens C. Kondrup for making the glassware, Jens J. Iversen for the metal work and the pressure measurements, Bente Rasmussen for preparation of the silicate samples and Haraldur P. Gunlaugsson for providing the olivine sample. This research was financially supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.