Purpose:
                  We developed innovations in shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) technology.
               
                  Materials and Methods:
                  Two technical upgrades were implemented in an original unmodified HM-3 lithotriptor (Dornier Medical Systems, Inc., Kennesaw, Georgia). First, a single unit ellipsoidal reflector insert was used to modify the profile of lithotriptor shock wave (LSW) to decrease the propensity of tissue injury in SWL. Second, a piezoelectric annular array (PEAA) generator (f = 230 kHz and F = 150 mm) was used to produce an auxiliary shock wave of approximately 13 MPa in peak pressure (at 4 kV output voltage) to intensify the collapse of LSW induced bubbles near the target stone for improved comminution efficiency.
               
                  Results:
                  Consistent rupture of a vessel phantom made of single cellulose hollow fiber (i.d. = 0.2 mm) was produced after 30 shocks by the original HM-3 reflector at 20 kV. In comparison no vessel rupture could be produced after 200 shocks using the upgraded reflector at 22 kV or the PEAA generator at 4 kV. Using cylindrical BegoStone phantoms (Bego USA, Smithfield, Rhode Island) stone comminution efficiencies (mean ± sd) after 1,500 shocks produced by the original and upgraded HM-3 reflectors, and the combined PEAA/upgraded HM-3 system, were 81.3% ± 3.5%, 90.1% ± 4.3% and 95.2% ± 3.3%, respectively (p <0.05).
               
                  Conclusions:
                  Optimization of the pulse profile and sequence of LSW can significantly improve stone comminution while simultaneously decreasing the propensity of tissue injury during in vitro SWL. This novel concept and associated technologies may be used to upgrade other existing lithotriptors and to design new shock wave lithotriptors for improved performance and safety.In the last 2 decades shock wave lithotripsy (SWL) technology has evolved significantly in terms of the means of shock wave generation, focusing, patient coupling and stone localization. However, the fundamental principle of SWL remains unchanged. Independent of the technologies used almost all commercial lithotriptors produce a similar pressure waveform at the focus which can be characterized by a leading shock front with a compressive wave followed by a trailing tensile wave. The acoustic fields produced by different lithotriptors differ only in terms of peak amplitudes of the pressure waveform, pulse duration, beam size, total acoustic energy and, therefore, overall performance. In contrast, significant progress in the basic research of SWL has been made in the last 5 years to improve our understanding of the primary mechanisms of stone comminution and tissue injury in SWL. It is now recognized that the disintegration of renal calculi in a lithotriptor field is the consequence of dynamic and synergistic interaction of 2 fundamental mechanisms: stress wave induced dynamic fracture in the form of nucleation, growth and coalescence of preexisting micro-cracks inside the stone, Based on these improved understandings various strategies have been proposed to improve the effectiveness and safety of SWL. A secondary pulse that can be produced by either a piezoelectric annular array (PEAA) generator or a second electrohydraulic shock wave generator has been used to intensify the collapse of cavitation bubbles near a stone surface for improved comminution efficiency. Therefore, in this study we developed innovative SWL technologies that can be upgraded on a Dornier HM-3 lithotriptor, the current gold standard in clinical SWL. Specifically a new PEAA generator that is completely compatible with an HM-3 lithotriptor and a single unit reflector insert to suppress intraluminal bubble expansion were designed and fabricated. Using phantom systems we have demonstrated in vitro that the performance and safety of the HM-3 lithotriptor can be significantly improved by these technical upgrades. The basic experimental system used in this study was an unmodified Dornier HM-3 lithotriptor (80 nF capacitor with a truncated brass ellipsoidal reflector of semimajor axis a = 138 mm, semiminor axis b = 77.5 mm and half-focal length c = 114 mm). Two technical upgrades were implemented on the HM-3 lithotriptor. First, a single unit reflector insert that has the same geometry as the 8-segment reflector insert we developed previously, To determine the optimal time delay to trigger the PEAA generator after each spark discharge from the HM-3 lithotriptor a pair of 2.25 MHz focused transducers (V395-SU, Panametrics, Waltham, Massachusetts) with a focal length of 150 mm and a nominal element size of 38 mm were also installed on the PEAA transducer carrier ( To streamline the operation of the PEAA generator, a computer program written and run in LabVIEW 5.0 (National Instruments, Austin, Texas, The pressure waveforms produced by the HM-3 lithotriptor and the PEAA generator were measured by using a fiber optic probe hydrophone (FOPH-300, University of Stuttgart, Germany). The hydrophone was attached to a 3-axis translation stage titled at 14 degrees so that the fiber optic probe was aligned parallel to the lithotriptor axis. To map the acoustic field of the PEAA generator, the hydrophone was scanned at 1 or 2 mm steps, transverse and along the lithotriptor axis, respectively. At each location at least 4 waveforms were recorded. The potential of vascular injury produced by the HM-3 lithotriptor using either the original or the upgraded reflector was evaluated using blood vessel phantoms made of single cellulose hollow fibers of 200 μm inner diameter following our established protocol. Two types of stone phantoms were used to compare stone comminution produced by the original and upgraded HM-3 lithotriptors. One was a spherical phantom (D = 10 mm) made of plaster-of-Paris (Bemis, Crossett, Arkansas) with a powder-to-water mixing ratio of 2:1, which mimics soft struvite stones. The other was a cylindrical phantom (D = 6.8 mm and L = 11.4 mm) made of BegoStone with a powder-to-water mixing ratio of 5:1, which mimics hard calcium oxalate monohydrate stones. The pressure waveforms produced at F The typical pressure waveform produced in water at the beam focus of the PEAA generator operating at 4 kV is shown in The −6 dB beam width of the PEAA generator in the lateral directions was determined to be 3.5 (from left to right) and 2.1 mm (from head to foot), respectively (  Using the original HM-3 reflector at 20 kV, rupture of the hollow fiber vessel phantoms could be produced consistently at F In the stone comminution experiments 2 different strategies of combining shock waves from the PEAA generator and the HM-3 lithotriptor were tested. In the first strategy shock wave from the PEAA generator was used to induce small cavitation bubbles near the stone surface which were then collapsed by HM-3 generated LSW. An inter-pulse delay of 30 μs was used to ensure that the shock wave-bubble interaction occurred near the maximum size of PEAA induced bubbles. Conversely, in the second strategy PEAA generated shock waves were used to collapse cavitation bubbles induced by the HM-3 lithotriptor. Based on previous experience, the inter-pulse delay was set to equal the collapse time of the LSW induced cavitation bubbles near a stone surface for maximum improvement in stone comminution.  To assess stone fragmentation further under clinically relevant shock wave exposure, cylindrical BegoStone phantoms were treated with 1,500 shocks generated by the original HM-3 reflector at 20 kV, the upgraded HM-3 reflector at 22 kV or the combination of the upgraded HM-3 reflector at 22 kV with the PEAA generator at 4 kV. For the combined system the PEAA generator was applied only during the first half of the treatment (ie the initial 750 shocks). It was found that the comminution efficiencies produced by the original and upgraded HM-3 reflectors are 81.3% ± 3.5% and 90.1% ± 4.3%, respectively, with the difference being statistically significant (p <0.05, In the last 2 decades, although various technical improvements in shock wave lithotripsy have been introduced by different lithotriptor manufacturers, the overall performance of modern shock wave lithotriptors has not reached the standard that was set by the original Dornier HM-3. Basic research in recent years suggests that stone comminution in SWL is a multifaceted, progressive process that involves a synergistic interaction of LSW induced stress waves and cavitation. It should be noted that although the reflector insert and PEAA generator are both used for cavitation control, their objectives and mechanisms of action are quite different. The reflector insert is used to produce a weak compressive shock wave in about 4 μs from the leading shock front to cancel the trailing tensile component of the LSW partially and, thus, decrease the propensity of small blood vessel rupture during SWL. It should be emphasized that the reflector insert does not eliminate cavitation, rather it only significantly weakens the expansion of LSW induced cavitation bubbles. In comparison to cavitation in tissue, LSW induced bubbles in the aqueous medium surrounding a stone are usually larger because of strong wave reflection and bubble aggregation, and the enlarged bubbles on the stone surface usually collapse within several hundred microseconds after the passage of the shock front. In this study passive cavitation detection was used to determine the collapse time of the cavitation bubbles during SWL to set the appropriate inter-pulse delay between the triggers of the HM-3 lithotriptor and PEAA generator. Real-time monitoring of bubble activities near the stone surface is important because several factors, including stone type (harder stones produce a stronger wave reflection and, thus, larger bubbles), lithotriptor output voltage, electrode condition, and size and distribution of residual fragments could all change the collapse time of the bubbles. Therefore, the inter-pulse delay should be adjusted accordingly during the course of SWL to achieve maximum improvement in stone comminution. Finally, because of the flexibility of the PEAA generator, this device can be used in different combinations with the HM-3 pulse to produce desirable shock wave-bubble interaction during SWL. We have shown that the auxiliary shock wave produced by the PEAA generator can be used to seed microbubbles at the lithotriptor focus before the arrival of the LSW or to boost the collapse of LSW induced large bubbles near the stone surface. Although both approaches produced significantly enhanced stone comminution ( Acoustic cavitation has an important role in stone comminution and tissue injury in SWL. However, the underlying mechanisms by which cavitation contributes to stone comminution and to tissue injury are different, making it possible to manipulate bubble dynamics selectively in different regions of the lithotriptor field to enhance stone comminution while decreasing tissue injury. By upgrading an original Dornier HM-3 lithotriptor with a reflector insert and a PEAA generator, we have demonstrated in vitro that the overall performance and safety of the resulting lithotriptor system can be significantly improved. These findings support our general hypothesis that innovations in SWL technology can be achieved via optimization of the pressure waveform profile, distribution, and pulse sequence in a lithotriptor field. Further work to confirm the advantages of this novel SWL technology by in vivo animal studies is warranted. Thomas Dreyer and Marko Liebler from the University of Karlsruhe, Germany collaborated on the measurements of pressure waveforms of the PEAA generator using a fiber optical probe hydrophone (FOPH 300).