The separation of titanium (Ti) (IV) in acidic leach solutions of vanadium slag by solvent extraction with trioctyl tertiary amine (N235) is proposed. Because the leach solutions contain a lot of vanadium (V) and iron (Fe) impurities, the effects of various conditions on the separation of Ti, V, and Fe were investigated. Then, the extraction mechanism and thermodynamics of the process were discussed. Upon using 35% (v/v) N235 and 65% (v/v) sulfonated kerosene as the extractant, over 82% Ti was extracted at a 2:1 organic to aqueous phase ratio (4 min at 298.15 K in a single-stage contract) with only 5% V and 10% Fe co-extracted. After the three-stage extraction, over 97% Ti, 7% V, and 18% Fe were extracted. By washing with 1.25 mol/L ammonium sulfate, most of the V and Fe impurities were removed with an insignificant amount of Ti wasted. Upon stripping with 1.0 mol/L ammonia at a 1:1 organic to aqueous phase ratio, approximately 90% Ti was recovered from the purified organic liquor. Other impurity elements such as Mn, Al, Mg, Ca and Si have little effect on the Ti separation. The possible composition of Ti-containing extract may be (R3NH)2·TiO3, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) analysis confirmed that the characteristic peaks representing NTiO and TiO were in the extracted compound. The mechanism of the extraction included the association of R3NH+ from N235 with TiO3
                     2− from the acidic leach solutions. Furthermore, thermodynamic calculations showed that Ti separation from the leach solutions of vanadium slag using N235 is an exothermic, irreversible, and possible reaction at 298.15–338.15 K.Vanadium (V) slag is a strategic material that is obtained from the high-temperature smelting process of vanadium–titanium magnetite ( As is known, the hydrolysis method can efficiently recover Ti from various Ti-containing solutions ( Several investigations have focused on the separation of V or Ti species using solvent extraction technology. Based on the V slag acidic leach solutions obtained from the ammonium sulfate roasting process (ASRP), this research used N235 to recover Ti instead of V and Fe in a sulfuric acidic mixture. N235 is a trialkyl amine, whose alkyl group is C The acidic leach solutions of V slag were generated from the ASRP, and their chemical composition are shown in A three-necked flask that was settled in a temperature-controlled water bath was used to mix the acidic leach solutions and organic phase, wash the loaded organic phase, and strip target elements from the purified organic liquor. The mixture was separated using separating funnels. After separation, the liquor's composition was determined by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES), and the contents of various elements in the loaded organic liquor were calculated using material accountancy rules. The extraction percentages (E), distribution ratios (D), separation factors (β), washing ratios (W A PHS-3C-type pH meter was applied to detect the liquor's pH. To observe the structure of the Ti-loaded organic phase, FT-IR spectroscopy (Nicolet iS10, Thermo-Fisher, USA) with a 400–4000 cm  As the N235 concentration increased from 25% (v/v) to 50% (v/v), the recovery rates of Ti, V, and Fe first increased quickly and then gently changed. When 35% (v/v) N235 was in the organic phase, approximately 82.28% Ti was extracted, and 5% V and 10% Fe were co-extracted. The separation factor of Ti/Fe (β     A washing experiment was conducted using the organic phases obtained from the single stage extraction. Ammonium sulfate was used to wash the Ti-loaded organic liquor. Using 1.25 mol/L ammonium sulfate as the washing liquor, 81% V and 86% Fe were washed under the conditions of a 0.5 O/A ratio, 298.15 K, and 8 min. The washing waste included an insignificant amount of Ti content (less than 3%). Furthermore, the wasted washing liquor that contained ammonium sulfate, V ions, and Fe ions could be cycled by crystallization and sustainably reused in the roasting process. To strip Ti from acidic or neutral extractant media, it is common to use H The extraction, washing and stripping rate of other elements such as Mn, Al, Mg, Ca and Si were investigated using previous optimal conditions. The results are shown in As an anionic extractant, N235 can convert to R Using excessive N235 to extract Ti, the concentration, [R To synthesize the (R The thermodynamics of Ti separation from the acidic leach solutions using N235 were calculated using Eqs.  Recovery of Ti from V and Fe in leach solutions of V slag using N235 was confirmed to be feasible. The results indicate that the optimal single-stage contract conditions include a 2:1 O/A ratio, an organic phase containing 35% (v/v) acidified N235 and 65% (v/v) sulfonated kerosene, a separation time of 4 min, and a temperature of 298.15 K. Using these conditions, over 82% Ti could be extracted with 5% V and 10% co-extracted Fe. After the three-stage countercurrent extraction, approximately 97% Ti, 7% V, and 18% Fe were extracted using N235. By washing with 1.25 mol/L ammonium sulfate, 81% V and 86% Fe from the loaded organic phase were removed. Furthermore, approximately 90% Ti could be stripped from the purified organic phase using 1.0 mol/L ammonia at a 1:1 O/A ratio. Other impurity elements such as Mn, Al, Mg, Ca and Si have little effect on Ti separation. The mechanism of Ti (IV) extraction by N235 was an anion–cation association, and the possible composition of the Ti-containing extract may be (R This research was funded by the