The traditional method for fixation of medial malleolus fractures has been with partially threaded (PT) lag screws extending beyond the physeal scar. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the biomechanical strength of an innovative method of fixation for medial malleolus fractures using a fully threaded (FT) lag screw that extends to the far endosteal cortex. Medial malleolus fractures were simulated in 12 matched cadaver pairs. A single PT 4.0-mm cancellous lag screw was placed in 1 ankle. The contralateral ankle of the same matched pair received an FT 3.5-mm cortical lag screw that extended to the far lateral tibial cortex and achieved endosteal purchase. Final torque of both screw configurations was recorded, and radiographs were taken to confirm appropriate screw placement. Average torque for the PT cancellous screws was 5.02 ± 2.34 in-lb. Average torque for the FT cortical screw was 7.63 ± 3.86 in-lb (p = .002). Visual and radiographic inspections revealed no displacement of the fracture site with use of the FT endosteal lag screw. Our results indicate superior biomechanical torque with far endosteal fixation with use of an FT cortical lag screw versus a traditional PT cancellous lag screw in a cadaver model. Far endosteal fixation is an alternative surgical option for medial malleolus fractures that provides added strength compared with PT lag screws and may obviate downsides associated with bicortical fixation.The most common medial malleolus fracture pattern encountered begins at the shoulder of the tibial plafond and extends obliquely toward the medial tibial cortex ( The traditional method of fixation of medial malleolus fractures advocated by the Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen group has been with two 4.0-mm partially threaded (PT) cancellous screws extending beyond the physeal scar ( The goal of this study was to investigate an innovative surgical technique for the treatment of medial malleolus fractures. We hypothesized that far endosteal fixation, without penetration of the second cortex, would provide increased biomechanical strength compared with traditional PT lag screw fixation, while minimizing the risks associated with bicortical fixation. Twelve matched fresh-frozen pairs of cadaveric ankles were harvested. The average (± standard deviation [SD]) age at time of death was 78.8 ± 12 (range 50 to 96) years. Seven cadavers were female donors, and 5 cadavers were male donors. Each ankle was held in a vice grip while an oscillating saw was used to make an osteotomy at a 45° angle to the axilla to simulate an Orthopaedic Trauma Association type 44-B2.2 fracture ( Average torque for unicortical PT cancellous screws was 5.02 in-lb before screw stripping (SD 2.34). Average torque for all FT cortical screws was 7.63 in-lb before screw stripping (SD 3.86) ( The most common surgical treatment options for medial malleolus fractures include 1 or 2 PT lag screws, FT bicortical screws, antiglide plates, and tension band constructs ( Antiglide plates are another surgical option for medial malleolus fractures, and they are typically used in vertical sheer fracture patterns as seen in supination adduction ankle injuries ( Recently, many authors have advocated bicortical fixation of medial malleolus fractures. Pollard et al ( In our study, we found unicortical PT cancellous screws to have an average torque of 5.02 in-lb, whereas FT cortical screws were found to have an average torque of 7.63 in-lb. These results correlate with those described by Ricci et al ( There were several limitations associated with our study. First, this was a biomechanical study that used human cadaver specimens with a variety of bone quality; however, this effect was minimized by using matched pairs for comparison. This was also a small cadaver study, limited by specimen availability. Fracture displacement using FT cortical screws was measured subjectively based on radiographs and may have been subject to bias. Our study used only 1 PT lag screw and 1 FT cortical screw for ease of comparison, instead of the more commonly seen 2-screw configurations that provide rotational control. We used Kirschner wires for provisional fixation, which remained in place during screw placement and provided rotational control until final torque was obtained. Our torque results were similar to those of other studies that used a 2-screw configuration ( In conclusion, our results indicate superior biomechanical torque with far endosteal fixation compared with a traditional PT lag screw, while minimizing risks associated with bicortical fixation. This technique may provide added strength with minimal risk to the patient in vivo. Future clinical studies are necessary to compare far endosteal fixation with the bicortical technique and will provide further valuable insight into the treatment of medial malleolus fractures.