Statement of problem
                  Titanium implant surfaces have been modified to improve osseointegration; however, the evidence for incorporating zinc into titanium implants to improve new bone formation and osseointegration is not clear.
               
                  Purpose
                  The purpose of this systematic review was to assess the efficacy of treating titanium surfaces with zinc on the osseointegration of implants.
               
                  Material and methods
                  The focused question addressed was, “Does incorporating zinc in titanium implant surfaces influence osseointegration?” Indexed databases were searched up to January 2016 using the key words “Bone to implant contact”; “implant”; “zinc”; “osseointegration.” Letters to the editor, case reports/case series, historic reviews, and commentaries were excluded. The pattern of the review was customized to summarize the pertinent data.
               
                  Results
                  Ten experimental studies were included, all of which were performed in animals (5 in rabbits, 4 in rodents, and 1 in goats). The number of titanium implants placed ranged from 10 to 78. The results from all studies showed that incorporating zinc into titanium implants enhanced new bone formation and/or bone-to-implant contact around implants. One study reported that zinc enhanced the removal torque on implants.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The current available evidence on adding zinc to titanium implants surfaces to enhance osseointegration remains unclear. Further investigation is necessary to assess its effectiveness and safety in humans and to establish a standard methodology and ideal compound for incorporating zinc ion into titanium implant surfaces in a clinical setting. Incorporating zinc in titanium implants to promote new bone formation has shown promising results in animal models; however, further investigation is necessary to assess its effectiveness in humans. Zinc (Zn) is an essential trace element that plays an important role in biologic osseous functions such as mineralization, hormone activity, and DNA synthesis. The purpose of the present study was to systematically review the efficacy of treating Ti surfaces with Zn on the osseointegration of implants. Based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines, a specific question was constructed according to the Participants, Interventions, Control, Outcomes (PICO) principle ( (P) Participants: Participants must have undergone implant treatment. (I) Types of interventions: The intervention of interest was the effect of zinc on osseointegration. (C) Control intervention: Osseointegration without zinc incorporation. (O) Outcome measures: BIC, NBF, and/or percent bone volume around implants with and without zinc. The eligibility criteria were as follows: original studies, clinical studies, experimental studies, inclusion of a control group (osseointegration around implants without Zn), and intervention: effect of Zn ion on osseointegration. Letters to the editor, historic reviews, commentaries, case series, and case reports were excluded. PubMed/Medline (National Library of Medicine), EMBASE, Scopus, Web of knowledge, and Google-Scholar databases were searched up to January 2016 using various combination of the following keywords: zinc + bone to implant contact; zinc + coating + implants; zinc + implants + osseointegration; zinc + osseointegration; zinc + supplementation + implants; zinc + osseointegration + supplementation; zinc + supplementation + bone to implant contact; dental + implants + zinc + osseointegration; implants + zinc. Titles and abstracts of studies identified using the above-described protocol were screened by 2 authors (S.V.K. and F.J.) and checked for agreement. The full texts of studies judged to be relevant by title and abstract were read and independently evaluated for the stated eligibility criteria. Reference lists of potentially relevant original and review articles were hand searched to identify any studies unidentified in the previous step. Once again, the articles were checked for disagreement by discussion among the authors ( A quality assessment of included studies was performed to increase the strength of the systematic review. Ten studies The initial search identified 414 articles. After abstract screening, 396 did not answer the focused question or were duplicates. In the second step of evaluation, 8 more articles that did not answer the focused question were excluded. In total, 10 prospective and in vivo studies In the studies by Li et al In 6 studies, In 6 studies, The results from all studies The quality assessment showed that the total quality score ranged between 8 and 10. The most common shortcoming among all studies was the lack of confounding factor assessment and short-term and incomplete follow-up of the experimental groups. Furthermore, because all studies were performed in animals, these results cannot apply to the human population. Overall, the quality of the included studies was good, although limitations of short-term follow-up and lack of clinical studies limit the clinical application of their outcomes. The quality assessment of the individual papers is summarized in To our knowledge, the present study is the first to systematically review the efficacy of incorporating Zn into Ti implants to enhance osseointegration and NBF. Because the studies included in the present systematic review Furthermore, because the experimental studies All studies Among the studies Confounding parameters such as poorly controlled diabetes mellitus, increasing age, stress, deficient oral hygiene, and tobacco use may also influence healing and are significant risk factors for alveolar bone loss. Zn systemic overdose may cause hyperglycemia, neurotoxicity, and other adverse reactions. The current available evidence is unclear as to the influence of adding zinc to titanium implant surfaces in an attempt to enhance osseointegration. Effectiveness and safety in humans, a standard methodology, and the ideal compound for incorporating zinc ion into titanium implant surfaces should be investigated in a clinical setting.