While many areas of science and technology are receiving increased funding from both industry and government, funding for other areas, especially those related to natural resource production such as mining, is decreasing from all sources. Industrial funding for mining R&D has dramatically declined due to small corporate profit margins; federal funding effectively ceased with the abolition of the US Bureau of Mines in 1995. The products of mining are critical to maintain our standard of living, but the process of mining is becoming societally unpalatable in the United States. Revolutionary technologies exist, or are envisioned, which could significantly reduce mining’s environmental impacts. However, there is currently little to no research by industry or the federal government directed at developing and implementing these technologies. It is critical that policy makers understand what various industries are capable of and are willing to do in terms of long-term research and development. There may be areas like mining where external factors, such as environmental well-being, give significant impetus to additional governmental funding, even in the face of apparent indifference by the industry in question.In the past decade, industry has overtaken the federal government as the major sponsor of research and development (R&D) in the United States The mining industry is widely viewed by the American public as almost anachronistic. The products derived from the industry, however, are critical for maintaining our current standard of living and for increasing the standard of living for people throughout the world. Currently, every American utilizes approximately 3.5 million pounds of minerals, metals, and fuels in a lifetime Much of the metals production currently required by US industry has moved offshore due to a combination of better overseas exploration and development opportunities, real and perceived regulatory pressures in the United States, and opposition from local and nongovernmental groups that wish to severely restrict mining in the United States. As more countries outside the United States also become less accepting of mining, it would seem incumbent on the industry to develop new, less invasive, methods of mineral extraction. Such methods will require the development of significant new technologies. However, given the absence of both industrial and federal investment, it is unclear how such developments will occur. The metallic mining industry is a global industry. It is dominated by a small group of multinational companies most of which are domiciled outside the United States. Significant metals production also comes from government-owned entities such as the giant Chilean copper producer CODELCO. The industry generally either finds or buys mineral deposits, exploits them through mining, and produces either metal concentrates or primary metals which are sold into the world market. Metals markets are characterized by long-term variability. In historic terms, the price of most metals has steadily fallen over the past century Mining involves the physical removal of rock which contains elevated concentrations of the metals of interest. The rock may be removed either from surface pits or from underground workings. Due to the generally small amounts of metal in the rock, the mining process generally produces large amounts of waste in the form of waste rock (which contains little or no metal but which must be removed to access the metal-containing rock) and tailings (rock that has been processed to remove the metals of interest) The trend over the past century has been toward mining of rock containing ever-lower concentrations of metals as separation and concentration techniques have improved and more efficient transportation methods have lowered the cost of moving large amounts of rock. Despite steady technological advances, the basic tenets of mining have remained much the same over the past half-century. Individual mines may have lifetimes of tens of years to over a century. The investment required to develop a major mine is commonly hundreds of millions of dollars. Once a mine and its ancillary facilities are constructed, it is often difficult and extremely expensive to alter. This makes the introduction of major new technologies at an individual mine difficult. In order to alleviate the environmental and social problems widely perceived as endemic to the present-day mining industry, it is likely that the industry of the future will move towards totally new mining methods, such as in-situ mining, where there is minimal to no ground disturbance; or to methods where nearly all of the material extracted from the ground is utilized in some way to minimize waste products; or to totally robotic mining. While the general outlines of these new mining techniques are known, a number of technological barriers need to be overcome to make them economic. In addition, it may be extremely costly to retrofit existing mines with new technology. Currently, there is little direct investment by industry or government to achieve these goals Historically, the metals industry conducted significant in-house research on the development of new exploration methods (geology, geochemistry, and geophysics), innovative mining technologies, and metallurgical techniques. Major American producers, such as Kennecott and Anaconda, supported important research facilities, as did several of the large overseas mining companies. During the 1970s through the 1990s, these research facilities were largely abandoned due to declining profit margins for most companies and a general trend toward consolidation in the industry. Government support for mining R&D in the United States has historically rested largely with the US Bureau of Mines, though important mining-related research has also been undertaken by a number of other federal agencies including the Department of Defense, the Department of Interior, the Department of Energy, and the National Science Foundation. As the country moved away from the concept of Strategic and Critical Minerals, federal funding declined for mining-related R&D outside of the Bureau of Mines. With the demise of the Bureau of Mines in 1995, significant federal funding directed specifically towards the mining industry effectively ceased. The only area where federal support has increased through the 1990s is in the development of technologies for the clean-up of historic mining wastes by both the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy. While these remediation technologies provide valuable insights for novel mining techniques, application has been limited. With the initiation of the Department of Energy’s Industries of the Future—Mining in 1999 Despite the absence of significant federal and industrial funding of mining-related R&D, the mining industry has continued to introduce technological innovations. While some of these, such as the introduction of solvent-extraction, electrowinning (SXEW) The challenge is how to deliver new technologies that will allow the mining industry of the future to develop radically new mining methods that are more in tune with societal wishes for less environmental disturbance while still maintaining a metals-consuming lifestyle. Several options present themselves. Major funding initiatives by federal government, industry, or a combination of the two, can be directed towards development and pilot testing of radical new technologies. Such a scenario would essentially recreate the Bureau of Mines or the company research centers. Alternatively, smaller research groups could be funded that focus on gathering technological advances in other fields and applying them to the mining industry. Such groups could be located in government labs, universities, or within individual companies. In Australia and Canada, mining companies have formed consortia What is required by both governmental and industrial groups, as well as by enlightened nongovernmental organizations interested in reducing environmental disturbances caused by mining, is to develop strategic plans for the long-term development of new mining techniques. Due to the probability of limited industry funding for R&D, and continuing weakness in federal R&D funding, a model for leveraging technological developments from other fields and focusing on adaptation of such technologies to the mining industry is probably the most realistic course in the near future. Research and development in the mining sector provide an interesting policy counterpoint to R&D in other, better-funded areas, such as biomedical engineering or solid-state physics, which currently enjoy healthy research budgets from both industry and government. Is the current lack of R&D in mining a result of industrial negligence or governmental indifference or both? Despite the fact that the products of mining are critical to the US economy and lifestyle, this sector has a poor public image. Does the lack of funding, at least on a governmental level, reflect the poor image held by a large proportion of the population concerning the industry? Given the current tight profit margins for most mining companies, how will they free funds for long-term, “blue sky” research? Although such research has a chance of dramatically reducing production costs and environmental impacts, it is inherently risky due to the potentially extremely long lead times and the possibility that competitors may be able to better, or more easily, adopt any innovations developed. In terms of a policy response, should the government move more aggressively to support R&D in a sector such as mining where industry is apparently incapable of conducting its own research? The public good may be fostered by helping industry to reach a new technological plane where mining is significantly less disruptive both environmentally and socially. However, to reach this new technological plane may involve significant expenditure of federal funds. Unlike the past where funding was directed at development of industry-specific technologies, the mining industry may present a situation where funding should be directed towards supporting research that is focused on adapting technologies developed in other fields to a specific niche market. It is critical that policy makers understand what various industries are capable of and willing to do in terms of long-term research and development. There may be areas like mining where external factors, such as environmental well-being, give significant impetus to additional governmental funding, even in the face of apparent indifference by the industry in question.