A flow-through yttria-stabilized zirconia (FTYSZ) electrode has been employed for pH measurements at 250 °C in concentrated electrolyte systems relevant to hydrometallurgical processing of nickeliferous laterites. Experiments were conducted using a custom-made flow-through titanium electrochemical cell specially designed for high-temperature potentiometric pH measurements. In the present work, we assess the accuracy and validity of pH measurements with theory at 250 °C on concentrated sulfate process solutions. First, binary sulfuric acid–water solutions were measured at concentrations ranging from 0.05 to 0.5 mol kg−1 and showed 0.3 pH unit increase on the average between 25 and 250 °C. The measurements were then extended to ternary and quaternary systems containing 0.0076–0.038m Al2(SO4)3 and 0.0276–0.276m MgSO4, respectively. Autoclave passivation against corrosion was successfully achieved using sodium chromate or hydrogen peroxide. In this technique, the potentials are measured against a Ag/AgCl flow-through external reference electrode (FTEFE). A reference solution of 0.1 mol kg−1 NaCl(aq) flows permanently through the electrode at a constant flow rate, so that the thermal liquid junction and streaming potentials are kept constant. The experimental results were compared with theory using available thermodynamic data for estimating the quality of pH measurements. An average difference of 0.15 pH unit was observed between measured and theoretical values at temperature.Potentiometric measurements are among the most widely used tools for exploring the thermodynamics of hydrothermal systems. Considerable amount of research has been carried out to find a direct way of measuring pH at high temperature and pressure potentiometrically. This has been a major challenge over the past three decades. Interest in pH measurements at elevated temperatures is stimulated by many fundamental problems related to the understanding of various aspects of high-temperature water chemistry. High-temperature and high-pressure electrochemical studies are particularly useful in the following industrial areas: nuclear power, geothermal applications, crystal growth, fossil power, deep oil well drilling, scale deposition, corrosion, as well as aqueous processing and hydrometallurgy. The latter applications involve the use of concentrated electrolyte systems to achieve high-productivity levels. Concentrated electrolyte solutions are difficult to characterize chemically as well as thermodynamically due to their highly non-ideal behavior. Nevertheless, the importance of pH as a key parameter in aqueous processing, such as pressure leaching systems particularly at high temperature, is well recognized because reaction rates Initial studies on high-temperature pH measurements in dilute solutions have been carried out by Aqueous electrolyte systems containing metal ions undergo hydrolysis in almost all instances and pH is regarded as the key variable that can most effectively characterize the solution behavior. With the advent of the yttria-stabilized zirconia sensor, it became possible to measure the pH of aqueous systems at temperatures as high as 300 °C even in the presence of redox species Since then, several researchers have reviewed, discussed and investigated the use and different applications of YSZ membranes at high temperatures and pressures, and have modified and improved the original design of the pH electrode Up to now, reliable high-temperature pH measurements have been achieved in relatively dilute chloride solutions at both sub- and supercritical water temperatures In the present work, the accuracy and the validity of the pH measurements at 250 °C is compared with theory on synthetic sulfate process solutions typical of hydrometallurgical processing of laterite ores. First, we measured the pH in binary H The electrode system used in these studies consists of a Ag/AgCl flow-through external reference electrode (FTERE) A schematic diagram of the experimental set-up including various solution circulations is shown in Three Chemmate Digital high-accuracy HPLC pumps (Rose Scientific), which provide a flow rate ranging from 10 A Keithley electrometer with a very high input impedance (10 Analytical grade of water (purity type 1, 18.2 MΩ cm resistance) from a Milli Q Gradient system from Millipore Corp. was used to prepare the reference, standard and test solutions. The calibration of the electrochemical system was achieved as described below. At the beginning of each test, the YSZ sensor was calibrated using three standard solutions. The standard solutions were pumped through the electrochemical cell from the flow-through YSZ side having the following compositions: 5×10 1×10 3×10 In all of the above solutions, 10 ppm of Na Tests were conducted at a constant pressure of 1250 psi (8.6 MPa) and at a constant temperature of 250 °C. Fresh solutions were pumped through the autoclave until the potentials between the FTERE Ag/AgCl electrode and the YSZ pH sensor attained a steady value within a ±5 mV. The potential difference was recorded continuously using a data acquisition system. This measured potential was converted to pH by using a dedicated software that takes into account the diffusion potential calculated using the approach described in The YSZ pH sensor consists of an oxygen ion conducting ZrO An important characteristic of the YSZ pH sensor is that it is insensitive to redox couples in aqueous phase In order to calibrate the system, we used three standard solutions, whose chemical compositions are known at room temperature and whose pH values at elevated temperatures can be evaluated using a reliable set of thermodynamic data. The potentials of the FTYSZ electrode in the standard solutions are measured and the pH values, diffusion potentials and water activities for these solutions are calculated in order to determine the calibration coefficient, The yttria-stabilized zirconia electrode is considered as a primary pH sensor and may be used for measuring pH without a prior calibration in thermodynamically equilibrium conditions. However, using the FTRE and FTYSZ, some irreversible thermodynamic contributions should be taken into account In order to come up with the pH of a test solution, we need to first calculate a calibration coefficient For an ideal electrochemical system, Sulfuric acid solutions have been used as standard solutions for calibration, because the equilibria of sulfuric acid at high temperature are well established The experimental potential data measured for the standard solutions and test solutions at fixed temperature and pressure are given in The measured potentials for the standard solutions and test solutions are given in Eight solutions were used as test solutions and they are shown above in Things are not, however, equally well established in the case of concentrated mixed metal sulfate solutions, as there is a lack of thermodynamic data at high temperatures for many metal sulfate complexes and solid phases. Very few experimental studies have been reported in the literature for H  On the other hand, solutions E, F and G in A flow-through electrochemical cell with a flow-through yttria-stabilized zirconia sensor and a flow-through external reference electrode was used for measuring pH at 250 °C in process sulfate systems relevant to hydrometallurgical processes of nickeliferous laterites for the first time. An acceptable agreement was found between the experimentally measured pH values with those theoretically predicted using thermodynamic data and the OLI® software for pure sulfuric acid solutions and for mixed metal sulfate solutions alike. In this work, we have shown that aluminum sulfate and magnesium sulfate behave differently at 250 °C. The impact of aluminum sulfate on pH at 250 °C is very small, where magnesium sulfate has a marked effect on the pH at high temperature by acting essentially as a neutralizing compound. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of this work by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Barrick Gold Co., Falconbridge Ltd, Hatch, INCO Technical Services, Ltd and Newmont Gold, and X.Y.Z. gratefully acknowledge a partial support of this work by U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF Grants EAR-9725191) and Army Research Office (ARO Grant DAAD19-00-1-0446).