A thermodynamic model for bubble growth in superheated liquid mixture was developed to investigate the heat transfer and mass diffusion mechanisms. The influence of component concentration and liquid temperature on bubble growth characteristics is the main focus of the present study. In the proposed model, the energy equation and the component diffusion equation for the liquid were coupled with the assumed quadratic temperature and concentration distribution within the liquid boundary layer. The vapor-liquid equilibrium of the binary mixture was estimated by the non-random two-liquid (NRTL) equation. The comparison between the current calculated results with the available experimental data demonstrates the accuracy of the proposed bubble growth model. The results show that the later stage of bubble growth in a binary mixture is primarily controlled by mass diffusion and also influenced by heat transfer. The bubble growth characteristics strongly depend on the mass fraction of the more volatile component and the liquid temperature. Both higher liquid temperature and concentration of the light component are beneficial to enhance the bubble growth. The effect of mass diffusion on bubble growth becomes weaker with increasing liquid temperature and decreasing initial mass fraction of the more volatile component.coefficient in Antoine equation [–] attractive term in PR equation [–] coefficient in Antoine equation [–] co-volume in PR equation [–] coefficient in Antoine equation [–] constant-volume specific heat [J/(kg·K)] mass diffusion coefficient [m internal energy [J] driving force of mass transfer [–] coefficient in NRTL equation [–] coefficient in NRTL equation [–] latent heat of vaporization [J/kg] the ratio introduced in Eq. thermal conductivity [W/m·K] coefficient in PR equation [–] characteristic length scale [m] coefficient in PR equation [–] mass [kg] pressure [Pa] parachor [–] rate of heat transfer [J] bubble radius [m] gas constant [J/(kg·K)] distance from the bubble center [m] temperature [K] time [s] velocity [m/s] mole volume [m mole fraction [–] mass fraction [–] dimensionless parameter in Eq. boundary layer thickness [m] diffusion coefficient in Eq. thermal diffusivity [m surface tension [N/m] kinematic viscosity [N·s/m activity coefficient [–] density [kg/m coefficient in NRTL equation [–] coefficient in NRTL equation [–] universal variable in Eq. coefficient in acentric factor [–] coefficient in PR equation [–] more/less volatile component critical species liquid mass radical/reduced bubble surface saturation superheat thermal vapor far field As a fundamental process with vapor-liquid phase change, bubble growth in superheated liquid is pretty common in thermal and chemical engineering, including electrolytic process, polymeric foaming, mineral processing, ink-jet printing, spring cooling and so forth ( Considerable efforts have been made over the past few decades to improve the heat transfer efficiency of spray cooling. A number of studies found that some additives, e.g. surfactant, soluble salt or nanoparticle, can make the physical properties of working fluid more superior with better cooling capacity ( Despite the high importance of multi-component spray cooling in the near future, not enough attention has been paid to investigate the microscopic mechanisms of heat transfer and mass diffusion. As one of the most important sub-phenomena in the nucleate boiling regime, the bubble dynamics basically affects the spray cooling heat transfer performance. Since the 1920s amounts of research has been conducted on mono-component bubble growth in uniformly superheated liquid or on the heating surface. Detailed overviews of several bubble growth models are summarized in As well known, the saturation temperature of alcohol-water mixture varies with the component concentration. The thermo-physical properties of the binary mixture, such as surface tension, density, latent heat of vaporization, etc., also differ from the respective pure fluids. Furthermore, the mass diffusion of both components also affects the bubble growth in a binary liquid mixture. Thus the bubble growth of the binary mixture exhibits significantly different microscopic characteristics from the mono-component liquid. However, it is still not clear whether the bi-component bubble growth is predominant by heat transfer or mass diffusion, therefore it requires further systematic investigation. To strive for a better understanding of heat transfer and mass diffusion mechanisms during nucleation boiling of a binary mixture, the bubble growth within a superheated binary liquid is studied with liquid thermal and concentration boundary layer taken into consideration. Then the influence of component concentration and liquid temperature on the bi-component bubble growth characteristics is discussed in detail. The mathematical model developed in this paper concerns the theory of spherically symmetric growth of an isolated bubble in uniformly superheated binary liquid mixture. The basic sketch for the simplified bubble growth model is shown in From the point of physical essence and the governing equations, there exists strong analogy between heat transfer and mass diffusion. In the present study, it is assumed that both the temperature profile and the concentration distribution within the liquid boundary layer are quadratic ( The temperature and concentration profiles given in Eq. Through simple derivation, the change rate of the universal variable along the radial direction can be obtained as In a spherically-symmetric coordinate system for a bi-component liquid mixture, the general form of energy and concentration diffusion equation is given as Assuming potential flow around the bubble, the instantaneous radial velocity of the liquid can be expressed as With proper distribution and boundary conditions in Eqs. When a bubble emerges in superheated liquid, the pressure inside the vapor bubble In the above equation, the change rate of the bubble radius can be denoted by the bubble growth rate Then Eq. The overall energy conversation equation for the bubble in superheated liquid can be written as ( Based on the reasonable assumption that the vapor temperature only changes with time but is spatially uniform inside the bubble, the sensible energy for changing the bubble internal energy can be expressed as The following boundary condition is satisfied at the bubble surface ( The concentration gradient at the bubble surface in Eq. As one of the most popular equation of state, the Peng-Robinson equation is adopted here to calculate the vapor molar volume, which can be expressed for a pure component in the following form ( To apply this equation to a binary mixture, the classical van der Waals mixing rule is used to calculate the parameters for the blend. The attractive term Since equilibrium exists between the vapor and liquid at the phase interface, the vapor concentration corresponds to the saturated condition, namely The saturation pressure of each species NRTL equation is employed here to estimate the activity coefficient The binary interaction coefficients are given by In this study, the best numerical values for The main steps of the numerical algorithm to solve the model presented in the previous section are as follows: Set the initial values of the parameters Input the initial vapor temperature Calculate the liquid mole fraction Calculate the activity coefficient of each component Calculate the mass fraction of the more volatile component at the bubble surface Solve the system of five ordinary differential equations which is compromised by Eqs. The calculation of bubble growth is considered to be finished until the desired bubble growth time has been achieved. Otherwise go to the next step. Update the values of All the thermo-physical properties of both liquid and vapor vary with temperature and composition, which in turn are dependent on time. Thus to achieve greater accuracy, the thermo-physical properties of the binary mixture have been updated at each time step according to the mixing rules based on the mass or mole fraction of each component, as shown in As for the binary liquid mixture, water and different kinds of light alcohols were used for five different mass fractions at different liquid temperatures when the ambient pressure was kept constant at atmospheric pressure. MEK-water mixture was only used for comparison with the experimental data of bubble radius. The detailed input parameters are listed in Numerous secondary nucleation bubbles are mainly responsible for the high efficient heat transfer of bi-component spray cooling in the nucleate boiling regime. Thus the bubble dynamics needs to be studied in detail. The variation of the liquid composition influences the local vapor-liquid phase equilibrium and the corresponding thermo-physical properties. As a result, it is of great importance to precisely predict vapor-liquid equilibrium for bubble growth. As can be seen in The proposed bubble growth model is validated by comparing the calculated bubble radius of the MEK-water mixture with the available experimental data ( It can be seen in Eq. However, it can be seen in In this section, three lower alcohols, i.e. methanol, ethanol and 2-propanol are chosen as additives to water to investigate the influence of alcohol type on bubble growth characteristics. For the abovementioned three kinds of alcohol-water mixtures which all exhibit positive deviations from ideal solution, the activity coefficients are all greater than 1, especially  The bubble radii then show a quick convergence after the initial surface tension controlled stage. In other words, there is no distinct difference in bubble radius using different kinds of alcohol. This can be explained by their vapor-liquid equilibrium phase diagrams. As can be seen in Since their bubble growth characteristics are quite similar, the representative ethanol-water mixture is chosen as the research object in the subsequent study on the influence of component mass fraction and liquid temperature. Methanol is not favorable for its high toxicity, while the high viscosity of 2-protanol (see In this section, the concentration range from pure water to 8 wt% ethanol solution is tested at atmospheric pressure. It can be noted that the curves for water and the 2% ethanol + 98% water are not shown in The most obvious distinction between bubble growth in pure liquid and binary mixture lies in the mass diffusion process caused by the presence of a second component. One phenomenon that makes mass diffusion more complex than heat transfer is that the concentrations of each component are typically discontinuous at the vapor-liquid interface while it is impossible for the temperature jump to occur. When the vapor bubble grows, the concentration of the more volatile component, i.e. ethanol in the present study, is lower at the bubble surface than that in the bulk liquid because of phase change. As a result, there will be a mass diffusion of ethanol at a microscopic level from the bulk liquid to the vapor-liquid interface, while the excess less volatile component diffuses away in the opposite direction. The mass fraction of ethanol at the bubble surface in In the single component boiling, the later stage of bubble growth is completely heat transfer controlled. As mentioned above, the mass diffusion of the components also affects the bubble growth characteristics in a binary mixture. From the thermo-dynamical point of view, the bubble growth rate for heat transfer controlled can be expressed according to Since there is close resemblance between heat transfer and mass diffusion, the two phenomena can be considered analogous to each other ( To quantify whether the heat transfer or mass diffusion is the dominant mechanism during bubble growth in a binary mixture, a dimensionless parameter The two characteristic growth rate, their ratio as well as some other bubble growth characteristics are summarized in It can be seen in The influence of the liquid temperature on bubble growth is qualitatively analyzed as follows. It is demonstrated in It is noticeable in The present theoretical investigation was performed to study the influence of component concentration and liquid temperature on bubble growth characteristics in lower alcohol-water mixture. A new thermodynamic model for a spherical symmetry bubble in superheated binary liquid film was developed in this study. The mass diffusion controlled growth rate was proposed to quantificationally demonstrate the effect of mass diffusion on bubble growth. The following conclusions have been drawn: The bubble radius predicted by the present model was compared with analytical solution as well as experimental data, and good agreement was achieved. Different from the pure liquid, the bubble growth rate in a binary mixture is governed principally by mass diffusion and also influenced by heat transfer. The bubble growth characteristics are significantly influenced by the liquid temperature and the component concentration. Both higher liquid temperature and initial mass fraction of the more volatile component are beneficial to enhance bubble growth. The effect of mass diffusion on bubble growth becomes weaker with increasing liquid temperature and decreasing initial mass fraction of the light component. None declared. Financial support from the In the present study, the Pendant Drop Method (PDM) is adopted to measure the surface tension. With the development of digital image processing technology, PDM has become the most commonly used method with high reliability and easy operation. It is assumed that when a pendant drop is suspended from a needle in a gaseous phase, the shape of the drop depends on the relationship between the surface tension and gravity. Thus the surface tension can be ascertained from the image of the drop through drop shape analysis. As shown in In the experiment, the pendant drop is recorded by the data acquisition system and then processed by the image analysis system to obtain a direct digitization of the shape. Then the digital signals are analyzed using some appropriate algorithm to determine the surface tension from the drop profile. The details about the experimental apparatus is shown in