The preparation of a magnesium hydroxy carbonate from magnesium hydroxide and carbon dioxide is described. The procedure involves the formation of a magnesium hydroxide slurry and sparging CO2 gas through it. Various experimental conditions are evaluated in order to obtain the conditions that result in the formation of the magnesium hydroxy carbonate. Slurry pH, slurry temperature, drying temperature, drying time and HCl addition are the conditions that are evaluated. The products that are obtained are identified by XRD and its decomposition characteristics studied with TG/DTA. It is evident from the results obtained that the experimental parameters have a significant influence on the products obtained.Hydromagnesite, the most commonly available magnesium hydroxy carbonate, has several useful applications. Although it occurs naturally, it could also be synthetically manufactured. The magnesium hydroxy carbonates are hydrated basic magnesium carbonates containing the equivalent of 40–45% of MgO Various procedures have been documented for the synthetic preparation of magnesium hydroxy carbonate. The aim of this study is to investigate a procedure for the preparation of a magnesium hydroxy carbonate from magnesium hydroxide. The procedure developed by X-ray powder diffraction analyses were performed on a Siemens D501 diffractometer using Cu K Thermogravimetric and calorimetric analyses were performed on a NETZSCH STA 409 simultaneous TG/DTA instrument. Sample sizes varied between 12 and 14 mg. A heating rate of 10 °C min In all instances a standard procedure, as stated A Mg(OH) The influence of slurry pH on the resulting product was investigated by preparing three slurry solutions at 20 °C with a final pH of 9.3, 8.2 and 7.3, respectively. After filtration all three solid products were dried at 60 °C The influence of temperature of the Mg(OH) Two Mg(OH) The pH of the other suspension was lowered similarly by the addition of 1 M HCl so that a lower final pH than the aforementioned suspension could be obtained. The CO  Five Mg(OH) MgCO The influence of drying temperature was also evaluated on the product obtained for 1 M HCl in The drying time was evaluated for a Mg(OH) MgCO Exactly the same procedure was followed as discussed for Mg(OH) The products that were formed by varying the experimental conditions during the preparation of a magnesium hydroxy carbonate are summarised in The method followed by The following attempt involved heating the slurry. An inherent problem that occurs at elevated temperatures is a decrease in the solubility of CO At a slurry temperature of 40 °C, the Mg(OH) An attempt was made to lower the slurry pH through the addition of HCl at a slurry temperature of 65 °C. Two different slurry pH's were obtained through the addition of 0.1 and 1 M HCl The next approach was to evaluate the influence of drying temperature. Since an increase in slurry temperature resulted in a decrease in solubility of CO When the TG curves The total theoretical mass loss expected for hydromagnesite is 56.9%. This corresponds to a theoretical mass loss of 19.3% (below 350 °C) and 37.6% (above 350 °C). The experimental results obtained were 17.4% (below 350°) and 39.5% (above 350 °C), which corresponded to a total mass loss of 56.9%. Dypingite gave a total mass loss of 57.5%, which compared well with the expected theoretical value of 58.5%. The experimental mass loss for dypingite below 350 °C corresponded to 24.2%, and above 350 °C to 33.3%, compared with a theoretical mass loss of 22.3% and 36.2% respectively. It is evident from these results that the experimental mass losses were in close approximation to the expected theoretical values. The unidentified product had a total mass loss of 64.6%. This consisted of a 25.6% mass loss below 350 °C, and 39.0% above 350 °C. The mass loss above 350 °C was close to that of hydromagnesite. It is evident that the mass loss below 350 °C was larger than that of hydromagnesite. This could be attributed to a relatively larger amount of crystallisation water in the unidentified product's composition, compared to hydromagnesite, since this mass loss was experienced largely below 250 °C. The difference between hydromagnesite and the unidentified product was more significant when viewing the XRD The similarities between hydromagnesite and the unidentified product suggest a probable resemblance between their compositions. It has been suggested By heating MgCO The results obtained for the different drying temperatures that were evaluated for the addition of 1 M HCl are given in The DTA curve that was obtained for dypingite is given in Up to the previous investigations, the products obtained were dried for 24 h on average. It was decided to investigate the influence of shorter drying times By boiling MgCO This procedure was evaluated in order to determine whether similar results could be obtained as those that were obtained for Mg(OH) The preparation of a magnesium hydroxy carbonate from magnesium hydroxide was shown to be possible only if the experimental conditions were chosen carefully. The resources that are available will also determine the procedure that will be followed. In many instances, it may not be viable to make use of elevated temperatures as in The authors wish to thank Dr. Sabine Verryn from the Department of Earth Sciences from the University of Pretoria, South Africa for doing all the XRD analyses.