The exponential growth of waste generation is posing serious environmental issues and thus requires urgent management and recycling action to achieve green sustainable development. Controlled low-strength material (CLSM) is a highly flowable cementitious backfill material with self-consolidating properties. The CLSM efficiency during construction and final performance at the site depends on its plastic properties. Plastic properties are responsible for workability, pumpability, stability, and lateral pressure on adjacent soils. This paper presents a critical review to date on the use of waste materials and/or by-products and their impacts on the plastic properties of the CLSM. Extensive previous studies demonstrated that the basic properties and content of waste materials as well as the amount of water in the mix design, play a dominant role in determining the plastic properties of CLSM. The discussed plastic properties of CLSM include flowability, bleeding, segregation, and hardening time, which are found to be inter-related. Proper mix design adjustment to accommodate the use of waste materials is possible to produce sustainable CLSM with acceptable plastic properties. Additionally, the discussion and analysis presented in this paper could provide a basis for future research advances and the development of sustainable CLSM prepared with waste materials.Specific gravity-1.9-2.8. Average particle size - 10 μm. Class C fly ash has cementing and pozzolanic properties. Class F and high carbon fly ash are less cementitious (refer to Readily available in large quantity and low cost. Have pozzolanic property. Increase in flowability. Decrease in bleeding and segregation. Delay in setting time. High volume addition is possible with accelerators/superplasticizers. Specific gravity-2.45 - 2.58. Particles with leafy flake shaped irregular morphology. Particle size - <200 μm. Chemical compositions refer to Have binding property. Increase in flowability. Negligible bleeding. Fast setting behaviour. High swelling (expansion) behaviour due to sulphate and lime content. Suitable to use for backfilling abandoned tunnels and tanks. Specific gravity-2.16-2.56. Porous surface and angular in shape. Particle size-75μm-25 mm. Chemical compositions refer to Available in large quantity and low cost. Suitable to use as an aggregate in CLSM. Increase in water absorption. Decrease in flowability. Increase in bleeding. Delay in setting time. Addition of fly ash/sand can solve the issues. Specific gravity-2.15-2.21. Particle size - 50 μm – 5 mm Chemical compositions refer to Readily available and low cost. Increase in water absorption. Decrease in flowability. Increase in bleeding. Increase of aggregate/cement is required. Specific gravity-3.2-3.3. Fineness-4000-4150 cm Chemical compositions refer to Available in large volume and have cementing property. Can be used in places of cement and fly ash. 100% replacement for cement is possible. Increase in water absorption. Increase in flowability. Increase in bleeding. Addition of slag or fly ash can control bleeding. Quick setting behaviour. Specific gravity-2.39- 2.55. Sub-angular to round in shape. Particle size varies between 0.15 and 0.6 mm. Chemical composition refer to Available in large quantity and low cost. Suitable replacement for fly ash and natural sand. Depends on the type of foundry sand, the water absorption will vary. Decrease in flowability. Increase in bleeding and setting time. Addition of fly ash and low-level cement is required. Specific gravity-2.8-2.89. Blain fineness-4330-4390 cm Chemical compositions refer to The finely grounded slag of particle size of less than 45 μm has self-cementing with a slow hydration rate. Performs well with cement in CLSM. Increase in flowability. Controls bleeding and segregation. Fast setting behaviour. Specific gravity-2.83-2.85. Fineness-4551 – 7970 cm Chemical composition refer to SSRS has several metal oxides (e.g., CaO, SiO Increase in flowability. Decrease in bleeding and segregation. Delay in setting time. Specific gravity −3.1-3.32. Particle in an angular shape. Particle size - 40–60 μm. Chemical compositions: 11.43% SiO Available in large quantity. Suitable to use in CLSM. Increases flowability. Reduce bleeding and setting time. No noticeable segregation. Specific gravity-3.22. Fineness modulus- 3.02 -3.70. Chemical compositions refer to Suitable to use as a replacement for sand in CLSM. Decrease in flowability. Decrease in setting time. Accelerating admixtures is required. Specific gravity-2.38. Unit weight-1011 kg/m Fineness modulus-2.4. Chemical compositions refer to Suitable to use as a replacement for sand in CLSM. Increases flow value and less setting time (<6 h). Accelerating admixtures can be added. Specific gravity of crumb rubber-0.53- 0.60. Particle size range from 0.075 to 4.75 mm. Can be used as an aggregate. Suitable to produce lightweight flowable fill. Readily available in large volume and low cost. Increase in flowability. Increase in bleeding. No segregation. Delay in setting time. Addition of sand is required. Particle size range from 5 to 20 mm. Fine RCA is angular and coarser than the natural fine aggregate. High water absorption. Chemical compositions refer to Available in large quantity. Fine aggregate suitable to use in trench backfilling and conduit bedding. Coarse RCA suitable to use in road bases and structural fills. Increase in water absorption. Decrease in flowability. Decrease in bleeding and segregation. Decrease in setting time. Addition of cement or cementitious materials is required for high replacement levels. Recycled glass: unit weight-1338 kg/m LCD glass: unit weight-1680 kg/m Chemical compositions refer to Available in large volume. Suitable to use as a replacement for natural sand. Less water absorption. Increase in flowability. Increase in bleeding and segregation. Delay in setting time. Specific gravity-3.02. Chemical composition of AMD sludge (%): Iron-5.0, Manganese-0.1, Aluminum-0.3, Calcium-22.0, Silicon-0.5, Sulfur-23.2. Presence of unreacted calcium in the AMD sludge can act as an accelerator. Setting time <24 h. Specific surface area- 15.90 m Chemical compositions refer to Suitable for use to replace cement. Red mud artificial aggregate can be used as aggregate. Increase in flowability. Decrease in bleeding and setting time. Specific gravity-2.63-2.65. Average water absorption-1.17%. Chemical compositions refer to Available in large quantity. Suitable to use as low-cost filler material. Specific gravity-2.60. Specific surface area-1.191 cm Chemical compositions refer Useful for filling voids of abandoned mines or excavated sites. Decrease in flowability. Water content-75%. pH-8.70. Specific gravity-3.10. Mean particle size-3 μm. Approximately 20,000 tons per annum produced in the UK. Delay in setting time. Increase of binder is required. Water content-88%. pH-4.60. Specific gravity-2.74. Mean particle size- 13.70 μm. About 75,000 tons per annum produced in Belgium. Delay in setting time. Increase of binder is required. Specific gravity-0.76. Density-616 kg/m Fineness modulus-1.47. Suitable to use as fine aggregate replacement. Decrease in flowability. Delay in setting time. Specific gravity-2.1. Water absorption-7.66%. Fineness modulus-2. Chemical compositions refer to Use as a fine aggregate or binder replacement. Decrease in flowability. Delay in setting time. Specific gravity-1.76. Specific surface area- 169 m Suitable to use in CLSM when combined with fly ash, blast furnace slag, and quarry dust. Specific gravity of wood ash-2.37. Chemical compositions of wood ash: 5.8% SiO Available in large quantity and mostly disposed of through landfilling. Low cost. Excessive bleeding. Fineness-1440 m Specific gravity-2.23. Chemical compositions refer to Can be used as fine filler material. Increase in flowability. Decrease in bleeding. reduce water content. increase fines. Flow too low increase water content. add water reducing admixture. reduce water content. increase fines. increase cementitious materials. add air entraining agents. add viscosity modifying admixtures. increase cementitious materials (future excavation to be considered). Add accelerating admixtures. Adjust water content. increase cementitious materials. increase fines. add air entraining agents. Reduce pump pressure. One of the possible ways to solve the global waste generation and conserve natural resources is by utilizing waste as aggregate or filler in cement-based materials for construction. Controlled low-strength material (CLSM), known as a self-consolidating cementitious backfill material, possesses unique features of high fluidity and low mechanical strength (∼2.1 MPa or less) for easy future excavation ( Due to its comparatively low-quality requirement of ingredients, CLSM has been heavily targeted for high-volume waste recycling ( The plastic properties are important criterion in determining CLSM efficiency during construction (workability, pumpability, stability, and lateral pressure on adjacent soils). The key plastic properties of CLSM refer to its flowability, segregation, bleeding, and hardening time ( Due to the varying characteristics of different waste materials, the resulting mix design and hence the plastic properties of CLSM could be affected. Therefore, this review aims to detail the impacts of each waste material and/or by-product on the flowability, bleeding, segregation, and hardening time of CLSM. The analysis of the available articles based on each particular waste material is depicted in Coal combustion products (CCPs) are the by-products produced during the coal burning process for electricity generation. CCPs normally include fly ash, bottom ash, ponded ash, and circulating fluidized bed combustion (CFBC) ash. Fly ash is the finest of CCPs and is classified into class C, class F and high carbon based on the type of coal burned. Fly ash particles have a spherical shape with an average particle size of 10 μm and a specific gravity ranging from 1.9 to 2.8. Class C fly ash contains a high percentage of CaO and MgO compared to Class F and high carbon fly ash ( To date, fly ash is still the most commonly used material for the production of CLSM due to its availability in large volume. Generally, fly ash was used to replace cement, and its use could increase the flowability of CLSM due to the spherical particle shape, lower specific gravity, and lower pozzolanic reactivity ( Other ashes such as CFBC ash, bottom ash, and ponded ash were also found to be feasible for use in CLSM. The incorporation of a high-water demand material in CLSM may lead to bleeding and segregation of the fresh mixtures. Typically, high fly ash content mixes with relatively high-water contents tend to release bleed water before initial set ( The hardening time of CLSM made with fly ash is greatly dependent on the type and amount of fly ash and water content. Usually, the inclusion of fly ash (class C) with a high content of calcium oxide (CaO) (more than 25%) in CLSM could accelerate the early hardening process ( Each year, the cement industry generates approximately 30 million tons of cement kiln dust (CKD) around the world ( It can be seen in The increase of CKD content in CLSM significantly reduces the bleeding and segregation of the mixtures. Foundry sand is a high-quality silica by-product generated from the ferrous and non-ferrous metal castings industry. The production of one ton of metal castings generates approximately one ton of waste foundry sand ( Numerous studies have investigated the feasibility of incorporating foundry sand as replacement of fine aggregate in CLSM ( The high-water absorption capacity of foundry sand significantly increases the bleeding of the CLSM mixtures ( Since foundry sand tends to retain more water in CLSM, it can prolong the setting time of CLSM ( The iron and steelmaking industries generate a massive amount of by-product slag during the production process, namely blast furnace slag (BFS), stainless steel reducing slag (SSRS), basic oxygen slag (BOS), baosteel slag short flow (BSSF), and desulfurization slag (DSS). The specific gravity of different slags ranging from 2.38 to 3.2 and the specific surface area varies from 3829 to 4551 cm Different types of slag derived from the iron and steel making industry have been studied and used as cement and fine aggregate replacements in CLSM. The increase in the BFS content (as cement replacement) resulted in a higher flow due to the retardation of ettringite formation ( Some studies showed that the addition of BFS powder in CLSM did not significantly influence the bleeding rate ( The stockpiling and disposal of waste tires has become a severe environmental problem. Every year, hundreds of millions of scrap tires are generated worldwide ( Recently, recycled crumb rubber has been successfully used as a fine aggregate in CLSM (  Construction and demolition (C&D) wastes are composed of concrete, asphalt, brick, wood, glass, and ceramics. Among them, concrete accounts for a major proportion (75% by weight) ( Researchers have demonstrated that the fine and coarse RCA derived from C&D waste are suitable for CLSM production ( It has been well documented that mixtures prepared with RCA exhibit a low bleeding rate compared to those prepared with natural aggregates. This is because RCA (with the presence of adhered old mortar) have a higher water absorption capacity than natural aggregates ( Apart from the waste materials discussed in the previous sections, other types of wastes and by-products, such as recycled glass, red mud, acid main drainage sludge, waste oyster shells, etc., have also been studied in relation to CLSM recently. In this section, their effects on the plastic properties of CLSM are briefly discussed. Recycled and LCD glass have been employed in the production of CLSM (  The use of higher fines content material such as limestone as fine aggregate could reduce bleeding and segregation of CLSM ( Researchers also explored the use of some other waste materials as part of the binder (cement or fly ash replacement) in CLSM, such as red mud, wood ash, rice husk ash, bagasse ash etc. According to the American Concrete Institute ( None. The The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at