The water-energy nexus considers the relationship between water and energy resources. The increase in environmental regulations and social pressures has made it necessary to develop processes that are conservative with respect to both these resources. This work outlines the development of an optimisation model of a water network comprised of water sources, water sinks and an electrodialysis unit for the partial purification of contaminated water. The optimisation model is based on a superstructure framework, where the objective is to minimise freshwater consumption, wastewater production, energy consumption and the operating and capital costs involved in the process integration. A comparison was done between the developed model and the more common black box model, which simplifies regeneration units to linear expressions. The results show that the black box approach can lead to inaccuracies of up to 85% in the costing of regeneration units. Furthermore, it is shown that there are significant environmental and financial benefits in the simultaneous minimisation of water and energy in water networks.In the realm of process integration, water minimisation involves the interaction of process units in a system with the goal of reducing the amount of freshwater consumed and/or the amount of wastewater produced by the individual units and the entire system. This can be achieved by either reusing or recycling effluent produced, in conjunction with partial treatment or regeneration of contaminated water. Partial purification can be achieved by membrane processes, such as electrodialysis, reverse osmosis, and ultrafiltration, as well as non-membrane processes, such as stream stripping or using ion exchange resins. The choice of which minimisation approach to adopt must be informed by the nature of the processes involved and the cost of regeneration. Water purification is an energy intensive process. As such, it is necessary to minimise the amount of energy required to treat effluent in a water network. The treatment process considered in this work is electrodialysis (ED). The process of ED, depicted in Different approaches to ED modelling exist, including the convective-diffusion model, and the fixed flowrate design model. The latter was adopted in this work, owing to its simplicity and ease of integration. An ED design model was developed by There are two major approaches adopted in water minimisation, namely, graphical and mathematical optimisation techniques. In this case, the mathematical optimisation approach was adopted, using the superstructure method. This approach allows the processing of complex systems containing multiple contaminants, as well as the capability to conveniently integrate the water network model with a regenerator model.( In many of the water network superstructure models to date, regeneration units are represented by a simplified linear expression of the unit performance. The disadvantage of this approach is that it does not provide an accurate representation of the cost of the water network. In most instances, the cost of purification is not considered, or a generic linear cost function is applied. This results in an offset between the actual costs of regeneration and the costs factored into the regeneration model. This work aims to highlight the adverse impact if this simplification on achieving an optimum performance index. A fixed flowrate approach was taken in the model development, i.e. a stream is described by the total flowrate of fluid and the concentration of each of the contaminants in the stream. According to this assumption,a water source is a unit that produces water or effluent while a water sink is a unit that consumes water. In short, the problem statement can be stated as follows. Given: A set of water sources, A set of water sinks, A set of regenerators, A freshwater source, with a variable flowrate, and known contaminant concentrations A wastewater sink, with a variable flowrate and known maximum allowable contaminant concentrations It is required to synthesise the water network that minimises the amount of freshwater consumed, wastewater produced, the energy consumed in the regeneration unit and the overall cost of the water network. In addition, it is necessary to determine the optimum operating and design conditions of the electrodialysis unit (e.g. area, number of cell pairs, current and voltage). Material balances are established on the source-regenerator-sink basis. For the units involving mixing of streams, i.e. the regenerator and the sinks, a contaminant balance was conducted for each contaminant. The performance of the regeneration unit was described by the contaminant-specific removal ratio, A comprehensive electrodialysis energy minimisation model is developed and included in the water network. The driving force for electrodialysis is the electric current, In order to account for the multi-contaminant nature of the ED feed, Based on the driving force, it is then possible to determine physical characteristics of the required unit, such as the membrane area, the length and the throughput. In addition, one is able to determine the amount of energy required for desalination and for pumping purposes, and subsequently, the capital and operating costs associated with regeneration. The combination of the water network and ED model culminates in an objective function that takes into account freshwater consumption, wastewater production, and accurate capital and operating costs of ED units and necessary piping interconnections. The above model is applied to a pulp mill and bleached paper plant adapted from Two alternate process integration scenarios were compared. Firstly, the case in which a black box model is used and the costing of the actual required ED unit is performed separately; i.e. water minimisation only. The second case involves simultaneous minimisation of water and energy, using the developed model. Two contaminants were identified,namely,NaCl and MgCl The results obtained from the optimisation are given in In the second scenario, the simultaneous minimisation of both energy and water within the water network results in a further reduction in freshwater consumption, wastewater production and cost of regeneration, as indicated in This work explores the shortcomings of the black box model in water network optimisation by adopting an accurate representation of regeneration units. It is shown that by simultaneous minimisation of water and energy in the network, there is a significant reduction in freshwater consumption and wastewater production as well as an overall reduction in the cost of the water network. This approach also results in an 80% reduction in energy consumption in the regeneration units. Furthermore, the simultaneous approach results in more favourable design parameters for the regeneration units.