The empirical kinetic models for the resinoid extraction from St. John's worth (Hypericum perforatum L.) aerial parts were analyzed to choose the optimum one regarding their relative simplicity and accuracy of fitting the experimental data obtained at different operating conditions. The following two-parametric models were analyzed: a parabolic diffusion model, a power law equation, a hyperbola equation, an exponential equation of the Weibull type and a logarithmic relation of the Elovich type. The aqueous solutions of ethanol (70 and 95% by volume) were used to isolate the resinoid from a charge of the ground plant material (the plant material-to-solvent ratio: 1:5 and 1:10g/mL; the extraction temperature: 25, 50 and about 80°C; and the mean plant particle size: 0.23, 0.57 and 1.05mm). All empirical models gave a good fit to the experimental data (root mean square, RMS<±5%), but the best one was Elovich's equation having the smallest RMS (±2.5%) and the highest linear correlation coefficient (0.975). The best empirical model was somewhat better than the physical model based on the film theory (RMS=±2.8%). The effects of the process factors on the kinetic model parameters were assessed using the full factorial test plan 24.specific area of the plant material (m parameters of the parabolic diffusion model: washing coefficient (1) and diffusion rate constant (min washing coefficient (1) intercept, which corresponds to the response for linear regression coefficients regression coefficients of two-, three- or four-way interactions parameter of the power law model incorporating the characteristics of the extraction system (min parameters of the hyperbolic model: extraction rate at the very beginning (min diameter of mean particle diameter (m) scale parameter of the Weibull equation (min parameters of the Elovich equation (L) mean relative standard deviation (%), defined by Eq. mass of plant particles of slow extraction coefficient shape parameter of the Weibull equation (L) diffusional exponent of the power law model (L) number of data points level of significance amount of ES extracted (g/100 amount of ES present in plant material (g/100 amount of ES extracted when the equilibrium is reached (g/100 amount of ES washed away instantaneously as the plant material is submersed into the solvent (g/100 extraction yield (= equilibrium (maximum) extraction yield (= time (min)  response value (i.e. value of kinetic model parameter) parameters of Eq. scale parameter of the Weibull equation (min bulk density of plant material (kg/m experimental calculated Solid–liquid extraction, also known as leaching, has a world-wide use in food, pharmaceutical and chemical industries mainly to obtain a desired component or mixture of components (so called extract) from plant materials by dissolution with a suitable solvent. In this way, liquid extracts of aromatic plants such as medicinal and spicy herbs are obtained, which have compounds with biological activities. Use of herbs and their extracts in the form of parapharmaceutical and dietary products had rapidly increased in the last decade. This trend provokes extensive investigations of both total extractive substances (ES) and individual bioactive compounds from a number of different plants all over the world. The investigators focused their attention towards yield, composition, extraction kinetics and biological activities of ES, which are the most important factors in making decision whether to apply an extraction process industrially. A well-known concept of developing, designing and optimizing extraction processes involves several steps. The selection of proper extracting solvent, plant material comminution degree, plant material-to-solvent ratio (hydromodul), temperature and agitation intensity is usually the first important step, aiming at the optimum operating conditions of the extraction from a particular plant material. In some cases, agitation of the suspension is not necessary, but in many cases it enhances the extraction rate and the ES yield. The rate of ES dissolution from the ground plant material in the selected solvent at different plant material-to-solvent ratios and temperatures is then investigated. Based on these investigations, the mechanism, kinetics and time duration of extraction process are determined. Finally, the composition and biological activities of the extract recovered are established. Mass transfer of ES from the interior of plant particles to the bulk of the liquid extract occurs via several stages depending on whether the plant material is fresh or dried Based on the mechanism of mass transfer assumed, the mathematical model of extraction kinetics is defined. The kinetic model is a useful engineering tool, considerably facilitating design, optimization and simulation of extraction processes and contributing to utilization of energy, solvent and time. Kinetic models can be divided into physical and empirical ones. Physical models are based on the physical phenomena of mass transfer through plant particles and from external solid surfaces into the bulk of the liquid phase Empirical models describe mathematically variations of ES amount in either plant material or liquid extract with time. These models are usually simpler than physical ones but are still suitable for engineering purposes. The most frequently used empirical model is the hyperbolic equation, known as Peleg's model We have recently analyzed the simplified physical models of resinoid extraction from the aerial parts of St. John's worth ( Five two-parametric kinetic models were analyzed: parabolic diffusion, power law (such as the Freundlich type), hyperbolic (such as the Langmuir type), Weibull's and Elowich's equation, frequently used in recovering of solutes from different types of solid materials, such as soil, ores, wastes, plant materials, etc. So far, according to the best knowledge of the authors, only the hyperbolic equation was used to model kinetics of extraction of plant materials Empirical modeling of the extraction is based on the following assumptions: plant particles are isotropic and of equal size; distribution of ES within plant particles is uniform and varied only with time; neto diffusion occurs only towards the external surface of plant particles; diffusion coefficient of ES is constant. For some models, the additional, specific assumptions are also introduced. The following third term polynomial of the form: When applied to extraction of plant materials, where there is no chemical reaction, Eq. The power law equation was used to reveal the mechanisms that governed the diffusion of any active agent through non-swelling devices The hyperbolic model, applied in food engineering science as Peleg's model: The extraction is first-order at the very beginning, and decreases to zero-order in the latter phase of the process. When Thus, the constant Weibull's equation can be successfully applied to almost all kinds of dissolution reactions such as nuclide release from paraffin waste Eq. Elovich's equation is a logarithmic relation: The aerial parts of St. John's worth ( Ethanol was purchased from Zorka Pharma (Šabac, Serbia). Two ethanol–distilled water solutions (70 and 95% by volume) were used as the extracting solvents. The plant material (10 The plant material (10 Parameters of the empirical kinetic models were calculated from their linearized forms ( The full factorial test plan 2 By studying the extraction of resinoid from aerial parts of St. John's wort, we confirmed The criteria used to evaluate how well models represent the experimental data and to select the best one were the magnitudes of the linear correlation coefficient and RMS. The higher is the value of linear correlation coefficient and the lower is the value of RMS, the better will be the goodness of fit.  Based on these results, Elowich's equation, having the lowest value of RMS and the highest value of the linear correlation coefficient, was selected as the best model for the resinoid extraction kinetics. The kinetics of resinoid extraction from the ground aerial parts of St. John has been recently modeled using the physical models of unsteady-state diffusion through plant material and film theory as well as Ponomaryov's equation The kinetic model parameters that achieved the best fit to experimental data for all extraction conditions applied are shown in To get more reliable information, the effects of the extraction process factors ( Statistical data processing was carried out by the analysis of variances, and the values of all linear regression coefficients are given in The influence of each process factor and their interactions on the kinetic model parameters was assessed by analyzing the linear regression equations. As it can be seen from When the ethanol concentration increased from 70 to 95% by volume, all kinetic model parameters decreased, except With increasing the extraction temperature from 25 Some parameters decreased such as With decreasing the plant particle size all parameters increased, except the washing coefficient In other words, most of the kinetic model parameters such as Observed variations of some kinetic model parameters could be explained by the physical phenomena related to the extraction process. The decrease of Of the two-way interactions, it is worth to mention the combination of the solvent type and extraction temperature influencing several parameters, and the combined action of the temperature and the plant material-to-solvent ratio reducing the washing coefficient ( The kinetics of resinoid extraction from ground, aerial parts of St. John's worth ( In order to achieve certain values of the extraction rate, the process factors have to be identified and controlled accordingly. Since the number of such factors in extraction of plant materials is large and the yield-factor correlations are usually unknown, statistical methods can be employed for identification of significant process factors for optimization. From this point of view, the present study analyzes the effects of the process factors on the resinoid extraction kinetics using full factorial plan and identifies the most important of them affecting parameters of the kinetic models. The major factors were found to be the type of solvent and the extraction temperature, which affected significantly almost all kinetic model parameters, while the effects of the plant material-to-solvent ratio and the plant particle size in ranges applied were less important. The results of the present study could contribute to the simulation and optimization of resinoid extraction kinetics for aerial parts of St. John's worth ( The Ministry of Science of the Republic of Serbia supported this work (Project B142073).