It has been determined that the reason for the formation of interphase substances (IS) during rhenium extraction is the presence of a black-colored fine precipitate in the feed solution. The same precipitate is formed when extraction process solutions are mixed with the original feed solution, which is wash sulfuric acid from the scrubbing of copper smelter off-gases. The elemental composition of the interphase substances has been determined, including the content of trialkylamine. The precipitate in the original solution is the result of chemical reactions between Re and Os oxides, and SO2 and H2S. It is also the result of the formation of humic acid in the gas phase and in the scrubbing of metallurgical gases.The formation of intermediate phases — commonly known as interphase substances, cruds (“jellyfish”), interphase precipitates, skims, stabilizing emulsions, and suspensions — occurs during the majority of solvent extraction processes for recovery of various elements. These substances are accumulated at the water–organic interface. Interphase substances (IS) present a serious problem for many manufacturers and the formation of these substances can be caused by various reasons. The following factors can cause the formation of interphase substances in a solution: high concentration of metal in an extract ( There is a strong reason to consider that the process for the formation of interphase substances is the function of many variables ( At the one of the copper plants in Kazakhstan, rhenium is recovered from acidic solutions resulting from the washing of metallurgical smelter gases ( The extractant is a mixture of 15% (vol.) trialkylamine (TAA), 10% 2-ethylhexanol, and 75% kerosene. Stripping was performed by ammonia at high ratios of organic and aqueous phases giving a basic amount of rhenium precipitates in the form of ammonium perrhenate, which partly captures the extractant and mother liquor. The mother liquor and the extractant were systematically removed from the apparatus, and the pulp periodically. In the process, pulp is dissolved in demineralised water or rhenium-containing solution at the boiling point. The solution is evaporated to a certain concentration of rhenium, and then filtered and cooled to crystallise ammonium perrhenate. The study of the rhenium extraction technology over many years has demonstrated that a black-colored fine precipitate accumulates in an extract. At the stage of the stripping, the precipitate distributes between the salt of NH4ReO4, the mother liquor and the organic phase. During the isolation of ammonium perrhenate from the pulp, the black precipitate is recovered as an independent fat dough-like or black oil-like product (hereinafter referred to as interphase substance IS). This product makes the procedure very complex; and as we have determined, it causes a loss of rhenium and the extraction reagent. It was a matter of considerable interest to determine the elemental composition of this product and the cause of its formation. For several years, samples of IS of various consistency were taken from the ammonium perrhenate production cycle for the analysis. During this time, some processes and the composition of the raw materials had changed. This paper presents the summarized findings of the long-term production monitoring. Sample No.1 represents the period of the operation of the sulfur afterburning unit, samples No.2 to No.4 represent the period after the unit was no longer in use, sample No.4 represents year 2009. Samples No.1 and No.2 are fat dough-like substances, samples No.3 and No.4 are oil-like substances. Samples No.1 to No.3 are black, and sample No.4 is grey. A weighed sample of interphase substance was thoroughly washed out with hot distilled water to remove rhenium-containing solution. Rhenium cleanliness was controlled by qualitative reaction with ammonium thiocyanate ( The composition of IS was determined by infrared — spectroscopic, X-ray diffraction (XRD), spectral and chemical analyses. Infrared Fourier spectrometer “Avator CsJ 370” was used for reading infrared spectra. A Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer using Co radiation at 40 The samples washed by water were initially analyzed by infrared spectroscopy. The interpretation of spectrograms demonstrated that all interphase substances contained the following: TAA (absorption bands: 2968, 2932, 2875 Samples No.3 and No.4 contained kerosene (CH In the IR-spectra of precipitates washed by heptane, the absorption bands of TAA, kerosene and ReO As The presence of humate-ions, most likely humic acid, in IS can be explained by the following. During the concentration of ores containing, as a rule, soluble compounds of humic acid, a part of these compounds remains in concentrates. Pyrometallurgical treatment of concentrates results in transfer of humate-containing compounds into the gas and dust mixture, likely in the form of sublimates. When the gas and dust mixture is washed with sulfuric acid solutions, humic acid is poorly soluble. The paper by The X-ray analysis of interphase substances generally identified only amorphous phases. However, it is notable that ∼ The quantitative content of elements in IS was specified by chemical analyses ( The cause of the high content of sulfur in sample No.1 is a carry-over of elemental sulfur from the afterburning unit into the gas scrubber whilst that of bismuth and mercury is caused by the composition of raw materials. The cause of higher content of cadmium (as a complex salt [Cd(NH After having examined the findings, we suggested that rhenium extraction from the mixture of the original solution and the mother liquor produced by stripping, resulted in transfer of the precipitate into the extract. However, by running the experiments we have determined that the mixing of the above solutions results in practically complete deposition of rhenium and osmium, contained in the mother liquor, in the form of a black-colored precipitate ( The content of the precipitate generated in rhenium solvent extraction in the original solution, raffinate, extract, and extraction reagent after rhenium stripping was determined by the methods we developed ( The results of long-term monitoring of the extraction process have confirmed our supposition of the presence of a precipitate in the original solution. Its content in the solution varies from 0.014 to 0.018 A study of the behaviour of the precipitate at the stage of rhenium stripping shows that, on average, 90% of the precipitate is recovered. More than 50% of which co-precipitates with ammonium perrhenate and more than 39% passes into mother liquors. An average content of precipitate in the extract varies from 0.42 to 0.53 Therefore, it has been determined that the presence of an insignificant amount of fine precipitate having a complex composition in the original solution, and its formation during mixing of rhenium-containing mother liquors with the original solution, is the cause of IS formation during rhenium solvent extraction. The contact time of the organic and aqueous phases did not have an effect on the formation of IS in the extraction system, but with increasing temperature, IS became more compact and formed at the organic–aqueous interface ( Metallurgical gases are complex multi-component systems, containing sulfur, carbon, rhenium, and osmium oxides, hydrogen sulfide, etc. Rhenium and osmium are sublimated mainly in the form of higher oxides, which generate the corresponding acids in the scrubbing of metallurgical gases. In an effort to determine a probability of which form of rhenium and osmium is produced in the gaseous phase and in wash sulfuric acid, the Gibbs free energy of probable reactions of rhenium and osmium compounds was calculated with the help of a software (HSC.5 Copyright (C) Outokumpu Research. Oy, Pori, Finland, A. Roine), as shown in Gas temperature prior to scrubbing varies from 250 When the gases are scrubbed, the major part of the rhenium and osmium compounds most likely co-precipitates with dust (as slime); whilst another part passes into the solution. The rhenium content in the slime reaches 2 It has been determined by chemical analysis that the precipitates recovered from wash solutions contain 7.5% of insoluble rhenium compounds, including Bi Visual examination of the gas duct prior to washing revealed fine non-uniform particles of sublimates on the duct walls which had black specks. These specks were amorphous and had an elemental composition similar to the precipitate in IS, except that the rhenium content was less and varied from 1.2 to 3.5%. There is practically no information in the literature about the forms of rhenium occurrence in acidic medium in the presence of sulfur dioxide. Some published papers ( Prior to SO It must be presumed that the presence of a humate ion in IS is caused by humic acid and its compounds in the gas scrubbing solutions, which are present in copper charge itself or formed in the decomposition of sodium lignosulfonate ( The studies performed have indicated that the presence of a black fine precipitates containing rhenium and osmium in the form of insoluble sulfides and oxides, as well as humic acid, causes the formation of interphase substances during rhenium extraction from acid solutions generated in scrubbing of copper smelter metallurgical gases. Thermodynamic calculations predict the formation of rhenium (IV and VII) sulfides, osmium (IV) oxide and sulfide in the gaseous phase due to the reduction of higher valence metal oxides with SO Interphase substances containing several percent rhenium and several thousand ppm osmium are an additional source of raw materials for the production of rhenium and osmium-187 isotope.