Lewatit TP-214 is a chelating ion exchanger with the thiourea functional groups. As mentioned by Allahyari et al. in the Letter to the Editor Lewatit TP-214 is not a resin which can be effective in the recovery of Pd(II) ions from the chloride media as mentioned in the paper which is the object of these comments. As was suggested by Allahyari et al., Lewatit TP-214 is not chemically stable enough. That means this resin loses its capacity after two days of contact with acid (HCl concentration was from 0 to 2.5 The ion exchanger Lewatit TP-214 has been applied for about 30 Based on the obtained results Despite the fact presented in Fig. 1 in the Letter to the Editor that the fresh Lewatit TP-214 (not TP124 as was in the Figure captions) resin capacity is higher than that acid treated, the resin had to be treated with acid to be applied in palladium(II) removal (palladium(II) exists in the form of anionic chlorocomplexes). If the sulphur content decreases with the increasing hydrochloric acid concentration and the FG degradation is observed, why did the authors determine only the sulphur content? What about the nitrogen content? Did the authors observe any changes of the ion exchange resin bed during the ion exchange resin FG degradation? What was another fact which leads to your statement? How many times have you determined the sulphur content, only one or more? How long was the ion exchange resin Lewatit TP-214 stored? It must be highlighted that proper storage conditions and the time of storage are one of the most important parameters to maintain physicochemical properties of the ion exchange resin provided by the manufacturer. However, we agree that Lewatit TP-214 applicability may be limited due to difficult desorption of noble metals from the loaded resin. Sometimes the ion exchange resin burning is needed to recover precious metals, but due to the high price of noble metal ions, much higher than that of the ion exchange resin under discussion, Lewatit TP-214 is still economical. Won et al.