A dynamic model describing styrene abatement was developed for a two-phase partitioning bioreactor operated as a biotrickling filter (TPPB-BTF). The model was built as a coupled set of two different systems of partial differential equations depending on whether an irrigation or a non-irrigation period was simulated. The maximum growth rate was previously calibrated from a conventional BTF treating styrene (Part 1). The model was extended to simulate the TPPB-BTF based on the hypothesis that the main change associated with the non-aqueous phase is the modification of the pollutant properties in the liquid phase. The three phases considered were gas, a water–silicone liquid mixture, and biofilm. The selected calibration parameters were related to the physical properties of styrene: Henry's law constant, diffusivity, and the gas–liquid mass transfer coefficient. A sensitivity analysis revealed that Henry's law constant was the most sensitive parameter. The model was successfully calibrated with a goodness of fit of 0.94. It satisfactorily simulated the performance of the TPPB-BTF at styrene loads ranging from 13 to 77 g C m−3 h−1 and empty bed residence times of 30–15 s with the mass transfer enhanced by a factor of 1.6. The model was validated with data obtained in a TPPB-BTF removing styrene continuously. The experimental outlet emissions associated to oscillating inlet concentrations were satisfactorily predicted by using the calibrated parameters. Model simulations demonstrated the potential improvement of the mass-transfer performance of a conventional BTF degrading styrene by adding silicone oil.One of the main limitations of the abatement of styrene-laden air streams by biotechnological processes is the poor aqueous solubility of the compound and its toxicity to microbial communities ( Several experimental studies on VOC removal in TPPBs have focused on the quantification of mass transport coefficients ( TPPB-BTFs present the same reactor configuration as that found in conventional BTFs; however, the recirculated aqueous solution is provided with the NAP. Although studies on TPPB-BTFs treating styrene are scarce in the literature ( Studies on TPPB-BTF modeling are limited. TPPB-BTFs are complex multiphase systems that represent a challenge from a mathematical modeling point of view. The occurrence of simultaneous transfer pathways for both VOCs and oxygen makes the experimental determination of individual mass transfer coefficients difficult ( In this work, a dynamic model for simulating the performance of a TPPB-BTF was assessed by adapting the model developed for a styrene-degrading BTF without a NAP addition, which was presented Part 1. The calibration and validation of the model were conducted using the experimental data from a TPPB-BTF treating styrene using silicone oil as the NAP. The results obtained from the multiphase system were compared with those obtained in a conventional BTF to quantify the potential benefits of adding silicone oil. The phenomenological mathematical model developed in this study aimed to provide a better understanding of the fundamental mechanisms that occur in this bioprocess, so that the critical design and operational parameters could be identified. A lab-scale BTF identical to that in Part 1 was used (0.144 m inner diameter, 1.63 m height, working volume of 20 L, working height = 1.23 m) with an external recirculation tank of 6 L. The BTF was packed with polypropylene rings (25 mm nominal diameter, a = 207 m The dynamic model describing the styrene abatement was extended for a TPPB-BTF based on the previous application of the model to simulate a conventional BTF treating styrene (see Part 1). The model accounted for simulating discontinuous irrigation. At periods without irrigation, the liquid phase was assumed to be a stagnant phase, and the convective transport was excluded in the modeling. One of the most accepted assumptions of TPPB in continuous stirred tank reactors' (CSTR) and aerated tanks’ configuration is that the mass transfer between water and a NAP is faster than that between gas and liquid phases; therefore, a water–NAP equilibrium is considered ( Mass balance in the gas phase Mass balance in the water–silicone liquid mixture Mass balance on the biofilm Model calibration was performed by fitting the experimental data and model results corresponding to the steady state of the TPPB-BTF performance. The calibration parameters selected were related to the physical properties of styrene: the partition coefficient between gas and the liquid water–silicone mixture (H The mathematical procedure for calibration was similar to that described in Part 1, consisting of the minimization of an objective function defined as the sum of the norm between the experimental and the modeled RE using the algorithm Model calibration was performed using the data from a TPPB treating styrene at several ILs and EBRTs ( The mass transfer coefficient obtained here was 19% lower than that in the conventional BTF (K The affinity of styrene for silicone oil has been further established in the literature with a well-accepted value of Henry's law constant of styrene in silicone oil (H Regarding the third calibration parameter, the value of diffusivity obtained from the water–silicone liquid, D The high correspondence between the model predictions and the experimental data is shown in To compare the TPPB-BTF and the conventional BTF, the EC curve versus IL at an EBRT of 15 s along with the model simulation for both systems is shown in A sensitivity analysis was performed to evaluate the influence of the calibrated parameters on the model predictions. The analysis was performed using the operational conditions corresponding to an IL of 43 g C m The model validation was performed by predicting the instantaneous evolution of the outlet gas phase of styrene in two case studies using the same TPPB-BTF working at an EBRT of 15 s. For this purpose, two different inlet concentration patterns were used. The first pattern tested involved four cycles of alternating inlet concentrations at ∼100–700 mg C m The developed models for conventional BTF (Part 1) and TPPB-BTF (Part 2) were used to compare their performance under different operational conditions to demonstrate the applicability and usefulness of the modeling approach and the potential performance improvement caused by adding silicone oil. First, the model from Part 1 was used to predict the response of a styrene-degrading BTF from the literature ( The first scenario corresponds to a BTF treating styrene with an IL of 12–38 g m The TPPB-BTF model was applied to evaluate the potential improvements in the styrene removal of this BTF. This is the first attempt to model a TPPB-BTF with biomass operated under typical conditions found in industrial BTFs. Further investigation on the influence of the percentage of silicone oil in the sensitivity of the model parameters would expand its applicability. A dynamic model to simulate TPPB-BTFs was developed, calibrated, and validated by extending the modeling approach used in Part 1 for conventional BTFs. The styrene removal of a laboratory TPPB-BTF was successfully simulated by modifying the physical properties of styrene in the water–silicone liquid mixture, accurately predicting the enhanced outlet performance. Moreover, the model predicted, with a high grade of correspondence, the transient conditions by simulating the peaks of the emissions associated with the high fluctuations in the inlet concentration. Model predictions consistently proved that the presence of silicone oil improved the removal of styrene by BTFs by enhancing diffusion and solubility, although mass transfer resistance increased by 19%. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first on the mathematical modeling of TPPB-BTFs operated under dynamic conditions according to industrial applications. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the