This is a review paper on the performances of both conventional and energy-absorbing rockbolts manifested in laboratory tests. Characteristic parameters such as ultimate load, displacement and energy absorption are reported, in addition to load–displacement graphs for every type of rockbolt. Conventional rockbolts refer to mechanical rockbolts, fully-grouted rebars and frictional rockbolts. According to the test results, under static pull loading a mechanical rockbolt usually fails at the plate; a fully-grouted rebar bolt fails in the bolt shank at an ultimate load equal to the strength of the steel after a small amount of displacement; and a frictional rockbolt is subjected to large displacement at a low yield load. Under shear loading, all types of bolts fail in the shank. Energy-absorbing rockbolts are developed aiming to combat instability problems in burst-prone and squeezing rock conditions. They absorb deformation energy either through ploughing/slippage at predefined load levels or through stretching of the steel bolt. An energy-absorbing rockbolt can carry a high load and also accommodate significant rock displacement, and thus its energy-absorbing capacity is high. The test results show that the energy absorption of the energy-absorbing bolts is much larger than that of all conventional bolts. The dynamic load capacity is smaller than the static load capacity for the energy-absorbing bolts displacing based on ploughing/slippage while they are approximately the same for the D-Bolt that displaces based on steel stretching.Rockbolts are widely used today in order to secure underground excavation spaces. Conventional rockbolts include mechanical bolts (i.e. expansion shell bolts), fully-grouted rebars and frictional bolts (such as Split set and inflatable bolts, e.g. Swellex and Omega). Conventional rockbolts are used mainly to deal with instability problems under low or relatively low rock stress conditions. A new category of rockbolt has recently been developed with the aim of combating high-stress induced instability problems such as rockburst and rock squeezing. This category includes cone bolts, Garford solid bolts, Roofex, D-Bolts and Yield-Lok bolts, which are here collectively called energy-absorbing rockbolts but referred to as yield bolts in some literature. Based on their coupling mechanism, rockbolts can be classified as continuously mechanically coupled (CMC), continuously frictionally coupled (CFC), or discretely mechanically or frictionally coupled (DMFC) ( On the other hand, rockbolts can also be classified as stiff, ductile and energy-absorbing from the point of view of bolt performance ( The performance of a rockbolt is dependent upon the loading conditions to which it is subjected. In situ loading conditions include the opening and shearing of single rock fractures, continuous rock deformation, or various combinations of the two. However, it is impossible, actually not necessary, to simulate every type of loading condition in the laboratory when evaluating the performance of a rockbolt. Among the loading conditions, the pull and shear caused by the movement of a single rock fracture are the most representative loading conditions for rockbolts. Therefore, it is widely acknowledged in the field of rock mechanics that laboratory pull and shear tests are generally the two most appropriate measures with which to examine rockbolt performance. Indeed, a good understanding of rockbolts performance is essential for their appropriate practical application. A great number of static pull and shear tests have been conducted in the Rock Mechanics Laboratory at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Norway, over the past two decades (e.g. The loading condition of a rockbolt is associated with its anchoring mechanism. Analytical loading models for conventional rockbolts were established by An expansion shell bolt is a typical two-point anchored support device composed of a solid shank and an expansion shell at the far end of the bolt ( Under a pull load at the bolt head, the shank of the bolt is stretched identically in every cross-section, resulting in a constant axial stress along the length of the bolt, as shown in Fully-grouted rebar bolts are bound to the grout/rock via ribs on the bolt surface, with the main anchoring mechanism of the mechanical interlocking between the ribs and hardened grout. This type of bolt is characterised by its reliable anchoring and high load capacity. When the bolt is subjected to a pull load at the bolt head, the load is simply transferred to the rock by the ribs. The axial load in the bolt decreases with distance from the loading point when the applied load is low. Bond failure will commence at the loading point when the applied load is beyond a certain level, propagating toward the far end of the bolt with an increase in the applied load. The residual shear stress on the bolt surface depends on the extent of the failure at the bolt–rock interface. The general pattern of shear stress on the bolt surface is illustrated in the theoretical model shown in Split set and inflatable bolts (e.g. Swellex and Omega) belong to the class of frictional bolt ( In theory, the ductile performance of this type of bolt is able to be achieved only when frictional slippage occurs along the entire length of the bolt. In reality, the slippage is only guaranteed for Split set because of its special installation procedure. In installation, Split set is pushed, for instance by a bolting rig, into the borehole. The push load has to be limited to a relatively low level in order to avoid buckling of the Split set tube. In theory, the pull load capacity of a Split set is equal to the maximum push load in installation. Both field and laboratory tests show that the load capacity of a Split set is approximately 50 kN/m ( An inflatable bolt is installed by expanding the folded tube to match the size of the borehole. Its load capacity is not only associated with the contact stress between the bolt tube and the borehole wall (resulting in frictional resistance) but also with the roughness of the borehole wall (resulting in mechanical interlocking). An inflatable bolt is maximum loaded in the bolt head if subjected to a load applied at the bolt plate as illustrated in Energy-absorbing rockbolts are loaded in different ways when subjected to loading, depending on their anchoring mechanisms. The loading model for two-point anchored energy-absorbing rockbolts, such as the cone bolt, Garford bolt, Roofex and Yield-Lok, is similar to that of conventional two-point anchored rockbolts ( Ultimate load and maximum displacement are two important parameters with which to describe bolt performance. In the laboratory, the load and displacement capacities of a bolt are evaluated through static pull and shear tests, and the principles of which are illustrated in  The dynamic performance of a rockbolt is often described in terms of impact velocity and kinetic energy input. The split tube test is usually carried out to measure the energy absorption of a rockbolt, as shown in A large number of pull and shear tests have been carried out on rockbolts using the bolt test rig shown in A rebar 20 mm in diameter was point-anchored in a hole drilled in the concrete blocks, with an expansion shell positioned at the far end of the bolt. Deformation occurred in both the plate and the bolt shank during the pull test. Under pull loading, the bolt finally failed in the thread at an ultimate load of 160 kN and total displacement of 55 mm ( A rebar 20 mm in diameter was fully grouted with cement mortar in a borehole of 32 mm in diameter. The water–cement ratio of the mortar was 0.32. Under pull loading, the bolt finally failed in the bolt shank at the joint ( A piece of Split set SS46, 46 mm in diameter, was pushed into a borehole of diameter 42.3 mm. Under pull loading, the bolt did not fail in the bolt shank but rather slipped in the hole ( A piece of inflatable bolt, 38 mm in diameter before unfolding, was installed in a borehole of diameter 48 mm. Under pull loading, the bolt did not fail in the bolt shank but rather slipped in the hole ( A twin strand cable, 2 × 12.7 mm in diameter, was cement grouted in a borehole. The ultimate tensile strength of the twin cable was approximately 380 kN. Under pull loading, the cable started to slip, i.e. yielded at 170 kN after a small displacement of approximately 25 mm ( A fibre glass bolt 22 mm in diameter was fully grouted with cement mortar in a 45 mm diameter borehole. Under pull loading, the bolt failed in the bolt shank at the joint. The ultimate pull load was 380 kN and the maximum pull displacement was 37 mm ( Invented in South Africa ( Invented in Australia, the Garford solid bolt consists of a solid steel bar, an anchor and a coarse-threaded steel sleeve at the far end ( Roofex bolts are also composed of an engineered anchor and a smooth bar ( Invented in Norway, the D-Bolt comprises a smooth steel bar and a number of integrated anchors along the bolt length ( The Yield-Lok bolt consists of a 17.2 mm round steel bar ( The load capacity of a mechanical rockbolt is mainly dependent upon the strength of the face plate and bolt thread, as well as the tightness of the expansion shell. As a result, the load and deformation capacities of this type of rockbolt may vary in a large range. Two-point anchored bolts often lose their support function due to failure of the face plate or thread when subjected to pull loading ( The load capacity of fully-grouted rebar bolts is the highest of the conventional rockbolts, with failure taking place in the bolt shank under both pull and shear loading. This type of bolt is characterised by high load capacity and small displacement ( Frictional bolts are anchored in the rock mass through the friction between bolt and rock, with frictional resistance dependent upon the contact stress and the contact condition at the bolt–rock interface. The pull load capacity of Split set is low because of the low contact stress at the interface ( Although the pull load capacity of a fibre glass bolt is approximately two times the strength of a rebar bolt, its shear load capacity is low ( Although both frictional bolts and twin strand cables slide under pull loading ( All the studied energy-absorbing rockbolts with the exception of the D-Bolt deform based on mechanisms involving bolt shank slippage either in the grout (the cone bolt and the Yield-Lok) or through the anchor (Garford and Roofex bolts). A common characteristic of the slippage-based bolts is that their ultimate dynamic loads are smaller than their static loads ( The performance of an energy-absorbing bolt is characterised by its energy absorption and displacement capacity. When absorbing the same amount of energy, the bolt exhibiting the least displacement is preferred since it is more efficient in restraining rock movement. It can be seen from Frictional bolts, i.e. Split sets and inflatable bolts, are still employed to deal with stress-induced instability problems in a number of underground projects at present. Their energy absorption, displacement and dynamic load capacity are listed in The performances of conventional and energy-absorbing rockbolts are summarised in The pull test results can be easily interpreted with the help of the rockbolt loading models presented in Section For a fully encapsulated rebar bolt, the maximum axial load occurs at the position where the pull load is applied ( Similar to a rebar bolt, a frictional bolt has its maximum axial load at the position where the axial load is applied, but different from the former, and the latter has a constant shear stress in the “de-bonding” slippage section ( The static and dynamic performances of conventional and energy-absorbing rockbolts are reviewed in this paper based on the results of laboratory tests carried out in the Rock Mechanics Laboratory at NTNU, as well as data reported in published literature. It is shown that mechanical bolts often fail at the plate, thread or inner anchor point, and are especially vulnerable to external disturbances such as vibrations. Anchoring reliability is also an issue for this type of rockbolt. Although a fully encapsulated rebar bolt can carry a high load, its displacement capacity is small. The advantage of this type of bolt is its reliable anchoring because of the full encapsulation. A frictional bolt can accommodate significant rock deformation, but can carry only a relatively small load. As the energy absorption of all conventional rockbolts is small, they are not appropriate for use as support devices in high rock stress conditions. Energy-absorbing rockbolt is a new type of support device that has been attracted significant attention in recent years. An energy-absorbing bolt can both carry a high load and accommodate large rock displacement, and thus possesses a high energy-absorbing capacity. Such bolts are therefore desirable support devices in high rock stress conditions. The current energy-absorbing rockbolts absorb energy either through ploughing/slippage at predefined load levels or through stretching of the bolt steel. The dynamic load capacity of an energy-absorbing bolt with a ploughing/slippage-based displacement mechanism is usually smaller than its static load capacity. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.