Sol–gel routes for synthesizing super ionic conducting solids (e.g. NaSICON) are more economically advantageous and results in higher homogeneity and purity as well as finer grain size of the final product compared to other techniques. One prerequisite towards arriving at an effective sol–gel process is to cope with the obstacles at each step of solution and gel preparations, and heat treatment process. In the present work we attempt to develop a procedure for synthesis NaSICON-type ZrNb(PO4)3 based on the Pechini method, which offers easier process and better quality of the final product. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was employed to evaluate the bonding characteristics of the obtained gel. The effect of heat treatment procedure on the purity and crystallographic structure of the final product was studied by the use of X-ray diffraction. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) together with Differential Thermal Analysis (DTA) was used to investigate the variations of dried gel properties with temperature and to identify the appropriate heating process.Fast ion conductors are ionic conducting solid electrolytes with high conductivity below their melting point In NaSICON structure with the general formula of AM(PO On the other hand, higher homogeneity and purity, finer grain size of the final structure, lower cost and low heat-treatment temperatures can be accounted as the advantages of the sol–gel method compared to the solid state for synthesizing such structures There are pertinent factors in the Pechini method which may affect the purity and characteristics of the final product. At gel production step, metal ions/citric acid molar ratio (M:CA), citric acid/ethylene glycol molar ratio (CA:EG), and pH should be controlled to prevent the precipitation of undesirable compounds and to ensure the completion of the esterification reaction. Heat treatment is the next important step, which can be held in one or more passes. During heat treatment, organic materials are removed and the desired structure is obtained. However, in some cases, one or more crystalline intermediate phases may be formed at lower temperatures, which transform to the final structure by heating at higher temperatures. To the authors' best knowledge, there is no work reporting the use of the Pechini method for synthesizing ZrNb(PO For synthesizing ZrNb(PO The final solution was heated at 96 Based on our preliminary studies (unpublished data) and also the Bakar et al. (2010) IR spectrum of the dried gel was recorded using a Nicolet Nexus 870 FTIR spectrometer in the range of 400–4000 Regarding the high affinity of Nb to form insoluble compounds in the aqueous solutions (especially Nb The mentioned Nb, phosphate and Zr solutions were mixed to obtain a solution containing soluble complexes of Nb, phosphate and Zr (sol). The mixing step of these two solutions strongly affects the stability of ion complexes and the transparency of the sol. Such effect is ascribed to the variation of pH during each step, which can cause the formation of an undesirable compound. Finally, by introducing EG to the sol and heating the system at 96 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) is one of the analytical techniques available for studying a reactive system. In order to shed more light on the bonding characteristics of the dried gel, FTIR spectrum was employed ( The peak that appeared at around 3415 Additionally, esterification reaction between ethylene glycol and citric acid might be corroborated by CO stretching band at 1194 and 1080 The obtained dried gel contains the main species of NaSICON structure (i.e. zirconium, niobium, and phosphate ions) together with many undesired compounds such as organic materials and ammonium compounds. Thus, heat treatment of this gel is essential not only for removing the extra undesired species, but also for crystallization of NaSICON structure. Therefore, two heat treatment procedures, namely single-pass and multiple-pass, were applied. The single-pass procedure was conducted at three different temperatures (700, 1000, and 1200 Close observation of In multiple-pass heat treatment, an initial two-step treatment was carried out at 400 and 900 Based on the results discussed in These results also confirmed by differential thermal analysis (DTA) curve. The endothermic peaks observed at 235 and 307 Based on the above findings, a multiple-pass heat treatment at 300, 950, and 1300 The SEM image of the powder heated at 1200–1200  In this work, ZrNb(PO In the preparation of appropriate solution (sol), Nb Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) of the dried gel showed the characteristic peaks corresponding to the monodentate ligand of metallic ions with carbonyl groups (COO−) and CO stretching, which confirmed the formation of CA complexes with both Nb and Zr and the occurrence of esterification reaction, respectively. Based on the results obtained by Simultaneous Thermal Analysis (TGA – DTA), a multiple-pass heat treatment at 300, 950, and 1300 SEM images of the powder obtained from a 400–900–1200