The effect of l-cysteine in different concentrations on the bioleaching of Ni–Cu sulfide and marmatite were studied with a moderately thermophilic, sulfur-oxidizing bacterium, strain of Acidithiobacillus caldus. X-ray diffraction (XRD) observations showed the change of bioleached solid residues and the effect of l-cysteine on the surface charges of minerals. It was found that adding certain amounts of l-cysteine to the leaching system of Ni–Cu sulfide largely enhanced the leaching rate, while l-cysteine inhibited the bioleaching of marmatite by A. caldus. The mechanism of l-cysteine interaction with mineral surfaces was studied by means of zeta potential determination and IR spectra.Moderately and extremely thermophilic microbes are potential catalysts for the bioleaching of sulfide minerals. An increase in temperature will increase the rate of bioleaching, but microbial activity will be depressed as the temperature approaches the upper tolerance limit of the microbe. Therefore, it is of interest to enrich new iron- and sulfur-oxidizers at high temperatures (  Some studies have shown that the recovery of precious metals such as gold from sulphide ores by bacterial leaching techniques was economically improved when carbohydrates, proteins and other substances of biological origin were added to the tank reactors. Thus, for selective copper recovery from chalcopyrite ores, the leaching media for bacteria must include a suitable nutrient supplement of potato and corn ( In this paper, the effects of The The bioleaching experiments were carried out with two different kinds of minerals. The Ni–Cu sulfide was prepared by grinding and sieving to a particle diameter between 70 and 100 The moderate thermophiles were grown in liquid media containing 5% (wt./vol.) dry mineral and the heat-sterilized solution that was adjusted to pH 2.0 with sulfuric acid. The initial density of cells was approximately 1 Suitable amount of solution was sampled from each flask at regular intervals to determine the concentration of zinc/copper ions in the leaching solution. This was measured by titration with EDTA and the pH value was measured with a pH probe calibrated with a low pH buffer. Zeta potential determination and IR spectra observations showed the effect of It can be seen in   The leaching of zinc from the marmatite by The exponential phase is extended from days 7 to 15 when no The surface charges of minerals treated with different concentrations of XRD patterns of bioleached Ni–Cu sulfide and marmatite indicate that the chemical compositions of bioleached Ni–Cu sulfide under different concentrations of According to the XRD analysis ( The IR absorption spectra of Ni–Cu sulfide samples under different conditions indicate that there exists an obvious difference. There is an obvious change within the range of 1250–500 Results from the IR spectra of marmatite samples under different bioleaching conditions indicate that there is a new absorption peak that appeared at 1604.5  The bioleaching of two sulfides shows that the suitable quantum of This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (30400010), Chinese Natural Science Foundation for distinguished Group (50621063) and National Basic Research Program of China (2004CB619204).