A new CFD model for Liquid-solid Fluidized Bed Separator (LSFBS), namely the Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian/RNG k-ε approach, was put forward and validated. According to the simulated separation results of two cases, the root-mean-square error (RMSE) between predicted partition numbers of all density fractions and corresponding experimental values were 2.47 and 2.83 respectively, demonstrating the CFD model was able to give accurate simulation results. The Rosin-Rammler model was used to describe the size distribution characteristics (SDC) of the feed, with the parameter D
                     
                        x
                      and n describing the fineness and particles size variation of the feed respectively. Single-factor tests and central composite design were then developed and simulated using the CFD model to investigate the influence of the two aspects of SDC on the separation performance of LSFBS based on density. The simulated separation results indicate that the finer the feed is, the greater the separation density (δ
                     50) and E
                     
                        p
                      value are; the smaller the particles size variation is, the smaller the δ
                     50 and E
                     
                        p
                      value are. According to the response surface analysis, the influence of feed fineness on δ
                     50 is larger than that of particles size variation while the influence of feed fineness on E
                     
                        p
                      is smaller than that of particles size variation; the interactive effect between these two factors has a noteworthy influence on E
                     
                        p
                      but insignificant influence on δ
                     50.The volume of coal in the 0.25–3 It is a very difficult and time-consuming job to obtain fine coal samples with particular SDC. Additionally, the proper mathematical model should also be determined to describe and control the SDC of the feed for a quantitative analysis on the influence of the two aspects of the SDC, i.e. the feed fineness and the particles size variation. This is most likely the reason why this problem remains unsolved by now. Generally speaking, the amount of lost particles with different densities decreases with decreasing particle size variation. However, if the feed particles are finer than the lower limit of effective separation size range, the amount of lost particles will still be relatively large, even though the feed consists of mono-size particles (the particles size variation is the smallest). Although this effect has been well known and been established by various researchers ( In the present study, a new CFD model for Liquid-solid Fluidized Bed Separator (LSFBS), namely the Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian/RNG CFD methods are widely used to analyze various separators' flow fields and obtain predicted separation results ( The governing equations of mass and momentum for continuous phases are given as follows: The CFD model of LSFBS put forward in the present study is called the Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian/RNG The interaction between continuous phase and discrete phase was achieved using the two-way coupling method. The momentum exchange The computational domains of the LSFBSs in Case 1, 2 and 3 were discretized into the structured meshes shown in A no-slip wall boundary was specified with a standard wall function. The pressure staggered option (PRESTO) was used as the pressure interpolation scheme and semi implicit pressure-linked equations (SIMPLE) algorithm scheme was used for the calculation of the pressure and velocity fields. The modified HRIC discretization scheme was computationally inexpensive and could give a sharp resolution of the gas-liquid free surface. Hence, the modified HRIC was used for calculating the air volume fraction with the VOF multi-phase model. Finite volume method (FVM) was used for the discretization of the governing equations and all physical quantities at the grid node were calculated according to the values at the neighboring control volume surfaces through the quadratic upwind interpolation convective kinematics (QUICK) scheme. Time step size was determined as 0.005 The SDC of the fine coal feed can be fitted with Gaudin-Schuhmann distribution model, Alfred distribution model, Rosin-Rammler distribution model, normal distribution model, logarithmic normal distribution model, general normal distribution model (normal distribution model with a coefficient of skewness) etc. ( After the stable gas-liquid two phase flow was obtained, discrete fine coal particles were added into the computational domains from the LSFBS' inlet. The operating parameters of the LSFBSs in Case 1 and 2 were in accordance with those in the corresponding literatures ( The root-mean-square error ( According to the separation results of Case 1 and 2, the Numerical separation experiments of fine coal feeds of various SDC were carried out in the computational domain of Case 3 using the CFD model introduced above. The LSFBS was filled with water at the beginning ( In the middle part, the relative velocity between adjacent stream layers was very small and the distribution of the turbulence intensity rarely changed over the whole flow time as shown in The flow field of the upper part was caused by the interaction between upward current and the feed flow. The stable upward current had not formed before the flow time of 20 As discussed above, the SDC of the fine coal feed includes two aspects, i.e. the fineness and particles size variation. These two aspects of the SDC are two variables that needs to be controlled in the numerical experiments (numerical simulation) to explore the influence of the SDC of the feed on the separation performance of the LSFBS based on density. Single factor numerical experiments were carried out with the operating parameters of the LSFBS and density components of the feed remaining unchanged. The first set of single factor numerical experiments contained five tests. Each test corresponded to one fine coal sample with specific SDC. The SDC of the five fine coal samples were that while fitting the screening data of the five fine coal samples with Rosin-Rammler distribution model, n parameter was the same ( According to  The second set of single factor numerical experiments also contained five tests. For the five fine coal samples in the five tests, parameter According to the separation results in  The relationship between separation efficiency ( Assume that the terminal settling velocities of two particles are equal. As the forces reach a balance and after rearranging, get The influence of the particles size variation of the feed can be analyzed by For feed one, Particle Particles out of red boxes in For mineral particles, the sizes of which are in the interval of 0.25–5 The first and second terms on the right side of The influence of the two aspects of SDC of the feed was obtained through preliminary experiments (single factor numerical experiments results). It is also necessary to study which aspect has a larger influence on the separation results. Based on this consideration, a central composite design (CCD) was chosen to detect the interactions between the two factors, model the response data and determine which factor had a larger influence on the separation results. The CCD in the present study has two factors (feed fineness Regression analysis was made to determine the proper mathematical models for predicting Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the Quadratic Model was performed. According to regression analysis with the reduced quadratic model, the obtained second-degree polynomial equation is provided in  The corresponding response surface plot is illustrated in According to the results of regression analysis, quadratic model is also the suggested model for Similarly, according to regression analysis with the quadratic model, the obtained second-degree polynomial equation for  In this work, CFD has been used as a tool to predict the gravity separation results on the coal samples in LSFBS. The Eulerian-Eulerian-Lagrangian/RNG The SDC of the fine coal feed can be controlled by the Rosin-Rammler distribution model during numerical experiments process. According to the results of single factor numerical experiments, A two-factor, five-level central composite design was performed. According to regression analysis, the quadratic model [ This work was financially supported by the