In the present study, white chocolate was enriched with different forms (encapsulated form, microalgae containing form) of Eicosa-Pentaenoic-Acid (EPA) and Docosa-Hexaenoic-Acid (DHA). EPA/DHA sources were added after conching process. Main EPA/DHA percentage of the sources changed between 5.80-38.7 and 8.50–70.5 g/100 g, respectively in total fatty acid content. EPA and DHA contents of the chocolate samples increased to 226.8 and 54.3 mg/25 g chocolate, respectively, in a consequence of enrichment. Water activity (0.290–0.340), hardness (5.31–7.97 N), yield stress (2.09–3.87 Pa), plastic viscosity (1.06–1.62 Pa s), Tend (31.4–33.6 °C), energy required for complete melting (ΔH) (9.53–11.3 J/g) properties of the samples were affected significantly (P < 0.05), however these effects were tolerable and in narrow ranges. The use of EPA/DHA in different forms and origins affected the colour saturation, after taste and overall acceptance of the samples (P < 0.05). The findings of this study showed that it is possible to produce white chocolate fortified with EPA/DHA from microalgae origin and in free flowing powder form with desired quality. According to the results, it can be concluded that white chocolate can be used as a carrier of bioactive substances which are heat sensitive.Primary chocolate categories are known as dark, milk, and white which mainly differ in the content of cocoa solid, milk fat and cocoa butter present in the formulation ( Driving force determining consumer acceptability of food products have changed especially in the last 20 years. Healthful characteristics of foods play an important role in purchasing behaviour as well as sensory and physicochemical properties and cost. The presence of functional compounds in the product have at least positive impact on purchasing decisions ( In the development of products including bioactive compounds, selection of “carrier” foodstuffs with widespread consumption may be advantageous for reaching larger consumer groups. Chocolate and chocolate-derived foodstuffs are potentially such bioactive ingredient carriers, although these foodstuffs have a negative perception due to proportions of fat and sugar in their composition. Functional food development studies associated with white chocolate are very limited, which is important since functionality of white chocolate is low compared to the other types since cacao is not present in the white chocolate. Various bioactive compounds can be used in the development of functional foods. Soluble and insoluble fibers, prebiotics, vitamins and minerals, herbal extracts and other phytochemicals are the main ingredients which can be used as substitutes or enrichment agents ( The aim of this study was to determine the effects of omega-3 fatty acids addition in different forms; powder, microencapsulated powder, oil and triglyceride form from different origins (microalgae and fish) on the quality characteristics of white chocolates such as physical, physico-chemical, thermo-gravimetric, rheological, textural and sensory properties. For the preparation of functional white chocolate samples containing EPA and DHA, cocoa butter (Altinmarka, İstanbul Turkey), sugar (SMS Kopuz, Istanbul, Turkey), whole and skimmed milk powder (Besel, Konya, Turkey), soy lecithin (Brenntag Chemistry, Istanbul, Turkey), polyglycerol polyricinalate (PGPR) (Palsgaard, Zierikzee, Netherland) and the EPA/DHA sources, as the following; Life'sDHA Life'sDHA MEG-3 Food Oil (TGO): Triglycerides, minimum 250 mg – maximum 320 mg EPA + DHA, minimum 300 mg total Omega-3 per g (DSM Nutritional Products, Istanbul, Turkey). Were used in the present study ( The formulation was adjusted considering EFSA advice which suggests 250 mg EPA and DHA consumption per a day. Depending of the serving size of the chocolate as 25 g/day, the required amount of EPA/DHA sources was calculated. For achieving the required level, MAP, MAO, TGO and TGM were added to the chocolate samples 5.97, 2.88, 4.04 and 6.78 g/100 g chocolate product, respectively ( Each sample group was prepared in lots of 10 kg batch. For this purpose, the melted fat components (comprising 20% of the total cocoa butter) and the dry powders (sugar, whole and skimmed milk powders) were mixed until homogeneous mixture formed while being heated to 40 °C. At the end of the mixing and warming, the chocolate mass was first pre-refined on a pilot-scale 3-roll refiner (Lehmann, Aaelen, Germany) and then mixed again and warmed to 50 °C. To achieve a mean particle size of 20–25 μm, the gap size/pressure between the rollers of the 3-roll refiner was adjusted and particle size distribution values were measured as described in Section After conching, EPA and DHA sources were added to chocolate mass at 32–33 °C. Then the mass was mixed nearly 5 min. Afterwards, a three-stage tempering process (33–35, 24–25 and 25–26 °C) was implemented by using pilot-scale tempering equipment (Aasted, Farum, Denmark). Temper index was in the range of 5.50–6.00 which was measured by a temper meter (Chocometer, Aasted Farum, Denmark). Subsequently, the moulding and vibration process were conducted at 27–30 °C. After 20 min of cooling at 5 °C, the process was completed. Samples were stored at temperatures between 13 and 15 °C and kept away from light and heat prior to analysis. The GC-MS technique was used to identify fatty acid distribution of chocolate samples ( Colour parameters of chocolate samples were determined using colorimeter (Chroma Meter CR-400, Konica Minolta, Tokyo, Japan). Chroma ( The method of A 10.0 g quantity of each white chocolate sample was homogenised by using a knife mill (Grindomix GM200, Retsch, Haan, Germany), and 2.0 g of the homogenised sample was used to determine the water activity (a Flow behaviour of the melted chocolate samples was determined at at 40 °C using stress or strain controlled rheometer (MCR 302, Anton Paar, Graz, Austria). Cylindyrical probe system was used for the determination of rheological parameters. The temperature of the system was adjusted by Peltier system and water bath. After melting of the chocolate samples at 40 °C, shear rate versus shear stress data were measured using Steady shear rheological properties of chocolate samples melted at 40 °C prior to the method of International Confectionery Association (ICA). Upward and downward shear rate ranged from 0.1 to 50 s Hardness value of the chocolate samples were determined using texture analyzer (TA-TXplus, Stable Micro Systems, Godalming, UK) equipped with 3-point bend rig probe system. The force required to break the sample was calculated using displacement versus force curve at 20 °C. The trigger force was set to 0.05 N. Hardness values (N) were expressed as the mean value of 5 replicates. Melting behaviour of the white chocolate samples was determined using DSC (Differential Scanning Calorimeter) (TA Q20, TA Instruments, New Castle, USA) according to the method reported by Sensory parameters (acidity, bitterness, sweetness, fatness, cocoa taste, particle size, melting in the mouth, smoothness, brightness, last taste in mouth, first strike, bloom, cold effect in mouth) of the samples were evaluated with “Multiple Comparison Technique” in chocolate samples ( ANOVA was conducted using MINITAB Express to determine if the effect of using different omega-3 sources on some physicochemical properties of functional white chocolates was significant or not ( The fatty acid composition of EPA and DHA sources added to the white chocolate samples are presented in Efficiency and sustainability of raw materials and bioactive compounds are necessary in the pilot or industrial food manufactures. Therefore, the current project focused on usage of commercialized EPA and DHA resources in the white chocolate production. Standard serving size of 25 g for chocolate/sugar confectionery products has been approved ( The biological activity of fatty acid composition and fat potentially added to cocoa butter in chocolate manufacture is important for nutritional and functional aspects. Until now, an addition of 5 g of vegetable fats other than cocoa butter in 100 g of chocolate is allowed in several Member States of the European Union (Denmark, UK, Ireland, Sweden, Portugal, Finland, Austria) ( In the current study, functional white chocolate was prepared by the addition of EPA and DHA from different sources. The content of EPA and DHA in white chocolate samples are presented in The colour of the food products is a critical factor for consumer acceptance. Many visual properties such as brightness, shape, surface smoothness, translucency and colour could be applied to characterize the appearance of chocolate ( Differences in composition and processing parameters during production causes colour variations in chocolate ( Whiteness index is applied as an indicator of fat bloom development. The grey–whitish (turned grey) appearance of chocolate indicates an increase in the whiteness index ( The water activity values of white chocolate samples were found to be in the range of 0.290–0.340 ( The EPA/DHA source components were added to the chocolate mass after the conching and before the tempering process; therefore only particle size of the control sample was measured. The specific surface area, D Results showed that the optimum particle size of 20 μm could be reached in white chocolate. Traditionally, continental European chocolate has been described as having a fineness of 15–22 μm particle diameter, while North American chocolate has a fineness of 20–30 μm (  Hardness is one of the most important characteristics of chocolate and defined as the point where the structure is deformed by applied force. After making bolus, hardness is detected by compressing the product between the teeth or between the tongue and the palate. Several factors including recipe, manufacturing techniques and fat stability affect the final hardness of chocolate. For instance, sugar-free chocolate generally has a soft structure than regular chocolate ( Hardness values were found to be in the range of 5.31–7.97 N ( Melting properties ( EPA/DHA source component addition had slight effect on melting profiles ( The consumer experience, healthiness expectation, advertisements and packaging design are the factors that influence the consumer's satisfaction of chocolate quality. The sensory quality of chocolate could be compared by how a product looks, tastes, feels, or smells while viewing products picture on the package leading to confirmation or disconfirmation. Panelists were informed and trained in pre-analysis training with the following definitions (appearance, aroma, textural characteristics) given in S1. In white chocolate samples containing EPA/DHA, according to panelist's assessment, sensory properties were not significantly ( Exploring the relation between diet and health has forced to consumers to consume food products which have health-beneficial effects as well as nutritional quality. Therefore, improvement of functional products is one of the main concern of both food industry and food research areas. One of the main functional ingredients used for enrichment purpose is omega 3 fatty acids. Selection of suitable food product for carrying omega fatty acids is critical since these functional ingredients are less stable against external factors such as temperature, light, oxygen. In the present study, suitability of white chocolate, least functional chocolate type due to deficiency of cacao in its formulation, was tested in terms of enrichment with omega 3 fatty acids (EPA/DHA). Quality characteristics of the white chocolates were slightly affected by EPA/DHA addition. Sensory evaluation results indicated that all of the enriched samples were within acceptable limits. When considering the fact that chocolate is likely consumed product by people of all ages throughout the world, it can be used for carrying omega 3 fatty acids with desired quality characteristics. This work was funded by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at