The results of flotation of lead-activated sphalerite, in presence and absence of zinc sulfate, are presented in this paper. Zeta potential and adsorption measurements as well as thermodynamic calculations, substantiate that activation of sphalerite by lead nitrate is due to a replacement reaction:
                        
                           
                              ZnS+Pb++=PbS(surface)+Zn++
                              
                           
                        
                     Depression of lead-activated sphalerite by zinc sulfate occurs by the reaction:
                        
                           
                              PbS(surface)+Zn++=ZnS+Pb++
                              
                           
                        
                     The equilibrium constant for this reaction is modified to suit the conditions at the solution/mineral interface.The conditions under which sphalerite can be depressed or activated constitute very important theoretical as well as practical fields of study. In this regard, numerous reports and review articles are published ( The most common agent used for sphalerite activation is copper sulfate. Also, Ag Although zinc salts do not affect the activation of sphalerite with silver or copper ions in the absence of a complexing agent, activation with lead ions can be controlled by the addition of zinc salts. Commercially, zinc sulfate is used as a sphalerite depressant in the separation of lead–zinc and copper–lead–zinc ores. However, starting with the pioneer work of Fuerstenau and Metzger, still there is considerable disagreement in the literature on the mechanisms by which zinc salts prevent flotation ( The objective of this study is to shed more light on flotation of lead-activated sphalerite in presence and absence of zinc sulfate. A high-grade sphalerite sample, from Broubach, Germany, was used in this study. The sample had about 62.99% Zn, 31.49% S, 0.03% Cu and 2.25% Fe. A galena sample, also, of high purity, from Eryfoud, Morocco was used. The galena sample contained 84.4% Pb, 13.08% S, 0.01% Cu and 1.08% Fe. Each sample was ground in a porcelain morter to different size fractions. For flotation experiments, a size fraction of −125+71 μm was used. Zeta potential measurement was conducted using a size fraction of −5 μm. The adsorption experiments were performed using samples of grain size −74 μm. Potassium ethyl xanthate, of high purity (BDH, UK) was used as a collector without further purification. Reagent grade HCl and KOH were used for pH adjustment. The experiments were conducted using zinc sulfate and lead nitrate of reagent grade (BDH, UK). All experiments were performed using bi-distilled water. Flotation tests were carried out in a modified Hallimond tube as described by (a) For the lead-activated sphalerite experiments, the pulp was first conditioned for 5 min with lead nitrate at fixed (3×10 (b) For the galena and sphalerite experiments (separate experiments) the pulp was conditioned for 5 min with potassium ethyl xanthate at fixed (3×10 For zeta potential determination, the apparatus described by (a) For the lead-activated sphalerite experiments, the mineral was conditioned for 15 min with lead nitrate at fixed (3×10 (b) For the galena and sphalerite experiments (separate experiments) the mineral was conditioned for 15 min in presence of 3×10 In the adsorption experiments, 5-g samples of −74-μm particles were conditioned for 15 min in 100-ml solution containing predetermined concentrations of either lead nitrate or lead nitrate and zinc sulfate. After conditioning, the pH of the pulp was measured. The suspension was then filtered and the concentration of each of Zn The flotation results, as a function of pH, for galena, sphalerite, as well as lead-activated sphalerite are given in On the other hand, The amount of Pb The flotation results in Other authors mentioned that sphalerite could be activated by lead ions by at least two distinct mechanisms depending on the suspension pH ( The chemical reaction between Pb The occurrence of chemical adsorption for collector (KEX) on the surface of lead-activated sphalerite explains its complete flotation from pH 3.0 to pH 9.0. If the collector is physically adsorbed, depression of lead-activated sphalerite may occur at about pH 7.0. Depression of lead-activated sphalerite below pH 3.0 is due to collector decomposition into carbon disulfide and ethyl alcohol. Above pH 9.0, depression is probably due to precipitation of lead carbonate as a result of the equilibrium of the system with CO Activation of sphalerite by lead ions can be controlled by the addition of zinc salts as shown in reaction (2), which is the reversal of reaction (1) above. This is due to the relatively small difference between the solubility of sphalerite (ZnS) and galena (PbS) where The results in To calculate the free energy change for each system, the following thermodynamic equations are considered ( Using these equations, the equilibrium Zn In the thermodynamic analysis of flotation systems, it is assumed that the new and more insoluble film formed (due to adsorption) may be treated as if it is a distinguishable pure phase. It can be argued whether surface PbS (formed on ZnS), which is normally a monolayer or so, can be treated as the pure PbS. Since Taking the equilibrium constant of (1) Equilibrium Zn (2) When ethyl xanthate is added to the system, it consumes an equivalent amount of lead (in precipitation of lead xanthate). This increases the value of Zn Microflotation experiments along with zeta potential and adsorption measurements have been conducted to investigate the activation of sphalerite by lead nitrate and the depression of lead-activated sphalerite by zinc sulfate. Experimental results as well as thermodynamic calculations corroborate the proposal of Fuerstenau and Metzger that: Activation of sphalerite by Pb Depression of lead-activated sphalerite by zinc sulfate is most probably due to the reaction (PbS