Antisticking power varies according to the talc considered. Besides its chemical properties, it is necessary to assess its physical properties related to functionality. It is difficult to define the physical properties of talc implicated in its antisticking power. In this work, different talcs were characterised and their performance in reducing sticking in tablet manufacturing was evaluated. The following parameters were studied: apparent density, morphogranulometry, roughness, and the specific surface through the adsorption–desorption of argon. Next, the relationship between the characteristics of talcs and their antisticking power was considered. Talc before and after delamination—which is a way to obtain talcs with different physical characteristics—was compared. Antisticking power appeared to be dependent on the basal dimensions of talc, and on the ratio value of the external specific surface measured by diffractometry to the total specific surface by the BET method. Models to express the effect of textural factors of talc particles on antisticking power were defined.In a previous work, the antisticking power of different types of talc, some of which are derived from the same initial talc but have undergone the physical process of delamination and/or granulometric classification, was studied This work included the study of characteristics such as apparent density, morphogranulometry, roughness and the specific surface through the adsorption–desorption of argon. Also, the relationship between the characteristics of talcs and their antisticking power was considered to determine the talc structure factors that best explain variations in the antisticking power of tablets. The materials chosen were the same as those used in a previous work: Avicel PH 102 was used as a reference for evaluating antisticking power; and talc of pharmaceutical quality (talc 1) from which different samples were obtained by delamination and/or granulometric classification. For this purpose, a dynamic air classifier, Hosokawa-Alpine 50 ATP, was used. Three products were obtained after classification ( product X.1 collected from the filter; product X.2 collected from the cyclone; and product X.3 collected from the turbine; with X=1 in the case of a direct classification of talc and X=2 when talc 1 was classified after delamination.  talc 1b, of the same nature as talc 1, not delaminated, used to study interbatch variations; and talc X, provided by another supplier, with different structural characteristics. After 10 taps, the apparent density (MV This was carried out by laser diffractometry with a Malvern Mastersizer S size analyzer based on the Fraunhofer model. Particle size distribution of very fine talcs was determined using the theory of Mie. The index of refraction was 1.56 and that of adsorption was 0.0555. Measurements were made on diluted aqueous suspensions of known concentrations (0.06–0.23 g/l according to talc granulometry) with laminar flow through the fine cell (0.5 mm) under analysis. This type of flow favours the selective orientation of lamellar particles, which present their basal surfaces perpendicularly to the laser beam. Under these conditions, measurements make it possible to determine ( the projected area distribution of particles according to their basal dimensions so as to calculate the mean basal surface diameter ( the distribution spreading index (IEL): an indication of the extent of the projected area distribution of talc particles in relation to the basal dimension given by the equation: ( The projected surface area of the lamellar particle population. The mean thickness The granulometric distribution in volume of Avicel 102 particles, which are considered to be spherical, was determined using laser diffractometry under dry conditions and based on the Fraunhofer model. The diffused reflection in the field of vision was used to evaluate the influence of delamination over brightness. There is a correlation between brightness and roughness of talc particles. The spectra were obtained with a Lambda 9 spectrophotometer from Perkin-Elmer. The device was equipped with an integration sphere whose surface was completely coated with barium sulfate. The roughness of the particle surface was assessed from the measurement of specular reflection The roughness of the particle surface and the specular reflection are related as follows: The specific surface area was calculated from the adsorption and desorption of argon at 77 K using a sorptiometer of discontinuous volumetry (Carlo Erba Sorptomatic 1900). For each product, the specific surface area was defined using, on the one hand the classic BET method ( According to the latter method, the specific surface area was determined by the gradient of two linear portions of the diagrams indicating the specific volume of the adsorbed argon (the volume corresponding to each gram of material) relating to the statistical thickness The thickness The first linear part, which has low The total surface area comparable to SSA−BET was calculated from the gradient of this first linear part. The second linear part, with high The second linear part represents adsorption over the remaining surface after the mesopores and small macropores have been filled. The surface calculated from the gradient of the second linear part is considered to be the estimated specific external surface area of particles, comparable to SSAL, while the surfaces of mesopores are considered to be the internal surface originating from the inner sides of intra-particle pores. In a previous work, a functionality assay was defined on a simple punch press to evaluate the antisticking power of talcs ( The transducer was calibrated so that 1 mV squared with 10 Measurements of the apparent densities are presented in Talc 1b behaves similarly to talc 1. Talcs 2b and 2c are comparable to talc 2. Morphogranulometric analysis is presented in For talc 2 compared to talc 1, modifications in morphology caused by delamination lead to a notable decrease in mean thickness The moderate relative diminutions of The apparent densities of talc powders increase when the mean basal dimension increases and when the mean shape factor of particles decreases. Estimation of the external surface SSAL (laser diffractometry) was compared to those of external SSA deducted from The results concerning brightness are presented in The results of measurements of tablet detaching force compared to the functioning time of the tablet machine are summarised in Looking at the data, three groups of talcs are noteworthy: The first group consisted of talcs 1.1 and 2.1 for which there is no sticking when they are used at a concentration of 1%. Their A second group made up of talcs 1.2 and 2.2 for which detaching values are lower than those obtained with other talcs. Their The third group made up of the other talcs. They present more pronounced sticking that cannot be distinguished. The The detaching force of tablets appears to be dependent on: the maximum basal dimension ( the mean basal dimension ( The Van der Waals molecular dispersion forces between the punch metallic surface and the particles of Avicel PH 102, between the metallic surface and talc particles proportionally to the surface concentration of talc particles on the punch–tablet interface area, are implicated in the mechanism of tablet adhesion, along with other surface phenomena like electrostatic forces or roughness. The Van der Waals interactions among Avicel PH 102 particles, among the talc and Avicel PH 102 particles, among talc particles themselves, can also be implicated as some Avicel and talc particles can be more strongly attached to the metallic surface than other particles. The expression of potential interaction energy This expression indicates that the attraction energy between the punch and the talc particles is proportional to the square of the basal dimension of the particle, which is considered as a disc of diameter Particles of Avicel PH 102 microcrystalline cellulose made up of easily distorted material, approach the punch (reduced In the experiment carried out with talc at 1%, only the parameters of talc were implicated in the observed variations of the detaching force while the parameters associated with Avicel PH 102 remained constant. The detaching force corresponds to the shearing force at the punch–tablet interface, and, by a friction factor, is proportional to the adhesion force represented by At the beginning of press functioning, The variable SSA ratio is indicative of the mesoporosity and the roughness of talc particles. These two factors become more important as the value of the ratio becomes lower. The latter has a positive effect on detaching force during the first 0.5–3 min, for two talcs with the same For mixtures of Avicel–1% talc, the force necessary to detach tablets from the punch surface seems to be: variable according to the functioning time of the tablet machine. The greatest variations are observed between 0.5 and 3 min, especially with the coarsest talcs. Beyond 3 min sticking is almost stabilised; variable according to the maximum basal dimension variable according to the mean basal dimension independent of the mean thickness The attraction force model of Van der Waals between a disc and a block of infinite extension, applied to lamellar particles of talc and on the punch surface, takes into account the dependence of force on the square of the basal dimension and its independence of particle thickness. The effect of the variable SSA ratio, at the beginning of press functioning, shows the influence of mesoporosity on the value of the Hamaker constant. The low value of this ratio, indicating high mesoporosity or low mean density of atoms per volume unit of particles, implies a decrease in the Hamaker constant and, consequently, diminished attraction force. The evolution in the detaching force in function of time, between 0 and 5 min, could be explained by greater attraction force between the punch and some of the particles, the coarsest and densest. This leads to irreversible adhesion of particles by creating a very thin film and by modifying the punch–tablet interface. The ratio of the projected surface of talc particles to the external surface of Avicel PH 102, without being an important factor in variations of detaching force, could indicate a non-homogeneous distribution of talc particles, especially of those lamellae which are coarsest. The ratio of the surface of talc particles to the surface of Avicel particles, in the punch–tablet interface, could represent a supplementary variable making it possible to improve the explanation rate of observed variances on the values of sticking. From a practical point of view, the results indicate that the best reductions in sticking will be obtained when using the finest talcs where particle porosity is highest. These characteristics favour the selection of microcrystalline talcs for this application. The mean basal dimension and the The value of AR does not affect sticking directly, within the context of experimentation carried out with 1% talc. However, it presents an important parameter in relation to the external specific surface created by talc particles. If the basal dimensions are small enough to diminish the adhesion forces, then the dose of talc needed to suppress sticking will be as low as the mean shape factor is high.