Background
                  This study evaluates the clinical outcomes in patients with proximal humerus fractures (PHF) treated with reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) as a revision procedure for failed fixation that have more than 5 years of follow-up.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  This is a retrospective study of 270 RTSA. The inclusion criteria for this study consisted of patients initially treated with either open reduction and plate fixation (ORIF) or fixation using an intramedullary nail (IMN), who were managed with a single-stage revision to a RTSA, and had a minimum of 24 months clinical and radiological follow-up. Six patients with failed fixation of displaced PHF were revised with RTSA. One patient was excluded from the study because she died. Five shoulders were reviewed for the purpose of this study. The patients were evaluated using Constant score, relative Constant score and visual analogue scale for pain.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up was 89 months (65–108). The mean absolute Constant score improved from 31, 81 to 44, 2 and the relative Constant score improved from 31,81% to 67,2%. Mean VAS improved from 6, 8 to 2. One patient rated their outcome excellent, 1good, 1 satisfied and 2 poor.
               
                  Conclusion
                  RTSA is an appropriate treatment as a revision surgery for failed fixation of PHF. Patients should be adequately warned that they will improve their function but may have complications following this salvage procedure.Proximal humerus fractures (PHF) are among the most common fractures in elderly people. [ Currently, there are many techniques of fixation of displaced PHF including close reduction and percutaneous pinning, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF), intramedullary nailing (IMN), hemiarthroplasty and reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA). [ The orthopedic surgeon has few available and effective options when fixation of PHF fails and includes removal and revision of the fixation, capsular release, arthrolysis and conversion to arthroplasty. RTSA can be a primary treatment option in acute PHF, with satisfactory outcomes reported. [ There are few studies evaluating the outcomes of RTSA for the treatment of failed internal fixation of a PHF. [ This is a retrospective study of 270 RTSA performed by the 3 senior surgeons (C.G-F., Y.L. and F.M.) at our Hospital between 2003 and 2016. The inclusion criteria for this study consisted of patients initially treated with either ORIF or fixation using an IMN, who were managed with a single-stage revision to a RTSA, and had a minimum of 24 months clinical and radiological follow-up. Patients who had previously undergone revision surgery or had deep infection were excluded. We have identified 6 patients who had 6 RTSAs for failed fixation for displaced PHF representing 2,22% of all RTSA implanted between 2003 and 2016 ( In 2 shoulders (40%), revision was from a Philos ( Radiographic assessment with a standard 2-view (anteroposterior and lateral scapular “Y”) was performed at 1, 3, 6, 12 months and then every year postoperatively. Patients´ shoulder function was assessed with the Constant score. [ All operations were performed with patients under a general anesthetic, supplemented with a previous inter-scalene block. The antibiotic protocol consisted of 2 intravenous dose of 2 All RTSAs were performed in women right-handed (100%) but only two RTSA (40%) were in the right shoulder. Their mean age was 74, 4 years (71 to 78) at the time of initial fixation. The mean time between initial fixation and RTSA was 12 months (1 to 31) and the mean follow-up after RTSA was 77,4 months (63 to 94). All 5 patients improved their Constant scores, relative Constant score and visual analog pain scale. The mean absolute Constant score improved from 31, 81 (range, 8–39) to 44, 2 (range, 12,5–60,9) and the relative Constant score improved from 31,81% (range, 31–62) to 67,2% (43,66– 96,87). Mean VAS improved from 6, 8 to 2. One patient rated their outcome excellent, 1 One revision following RTSA was performed because joint stiffness changing the Delta Xtend glenoid component of 38 Standard to 42 eccentric. This patient was dissatisfied because although the pain deceased, her preoperative functional status did not improve. Another patient had shoulder joint stiffness too, but as she improved her shoulder pain, she declined further revision surgery. There were no intra-operative or post-operative complications in RTSA surgeries. Displaced PHF are increasing in frequency with aging population and the number of surgeries is also increasing as a definitive treatment. [ Failure of fixation in PHF with plates or nails can occur as a result of multiple factors: improper hardware insertion, inadequate fixation, osteopenia/osteoporosis, over-aggressive mobilization, or patient non-compliance with pre-operative instructions, as in the geriatric population. Intramedullary fixation with locked nail is an adequate option because it is less invasive than plates and operating time can be considerably reduce when a percutaneous technique is used. Although overall union rates following intramedullary nailing are reported to be more than 90%, the clinical outcomes of 3- and 4-part PHF are noted to be inferior. [ We have reported on outcomes and complications when comparing a 26 straight nails (Multiloc PHN; Synthes GmbH, Solothurn, Switzerland) to a 26 curvilinear nails (Polarus) design for displaced PHF. Patients treated with Multiloc nail (MPHN) had better functional outcomes mainly in terms of pain. In the Polarus nail group, 11 patients (42%) required an additional surgery for hardware removal due to loss of fixation and/or prominent hardware (subacromial impingement). In the MPHN group, there were 3 cases of hardware removal (11,5%) at final follow-up. We concluded that straight intramedullary nail had a comparable union rate to an accepted curvilinear design, with a much lower incidence of rotator cuff pain and dysfunction. [ The biomechanical benefits of locked pre-contoured proximal humerus plate have been well described, but recent reports describing complication rates between 15% and 36%. [ Hemiarthroplasty for irreparable PHF in the elderly population was the only solution until 10 years; however, results may also included unpredictable functional outcomes. [ According to our series ( We currently use RTSA as a primary treatment as a primary treatment option for displaced PHF in the elderly. [ Hussey MM et al. evaluated the clinical outcomes in 19 patients with failed internal fixation of a PHF who underwent implant removal and RTSA. [ Dezfuli B et al. have reported the outcomes of RTSAs performed in 49 patients with PHF; 11 for failed open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). [ Grubhofer F et al. reviewed 44 patients after revision of failed ORIF of PHF using RTSA. [ Nikola C et al. compared the functional outcomes of RTSA in 21 patients with acute fracture and 16 patients with sequelae of PHF. [ All of these published series report on the successful outcome of RTSA after failed fixation of PHF, but have a high incidence of complications. Our series has fewer patients (5 patients) and the functional results are not as good as the published series but our number of complications is similar (20%). We have recently published a retrospective study of RTSA in acute PHF (7) that had a higher clinical outcome but with fewer complications (9%). Limitations of this study include its retrospective design and the small number of patients collected. However, the strengths of our study are the follow-up of more than 5 years and it was performed at a single university hospital by three trained shoulder surgeon using a similar technique. RTSA is an appropriate treatment as a revision surgery for failed fixation of PHF. Patients should be adequately warned that they will improve their shoulder function but may have complications following this salvage procedure. Carlos García-Fernández, Yaiza Lopiz, Belén Rizo, Laura Serrano-Mateo, Borja Alcobía-Díaz, Alberto Rodriguez-González and Fernando Marco declare that there are no conflicts of interest.