Despite reservations of a number of researchers concerning the applicability of Bond's equation for relating specific energy to the size reduction of rocks, his approach has become an industry standard.
                  Data from a large number of pilot and full-scale autogenous (AG), semi-autogenous (SAG) and ball mill circuits are used to show that Bond's equation does not hold over the particle size range −100 mm+0.1 mm. However, if suitable correction factors are applied its results can be made to approximate observed values. It is shown that a more appropriate relationship relies on a particle size exponent that is a function of size.
                  This new relationship, which does not rely on the need for correction factors, is used to predict the specific energy requirements of a number of autogenous, semi-autogenous and ball mill grinding circuits. The results are compared to those obtained using Bond's equation and are shown to provide a more precise prediction of specific power requirements.It has been 50 years since If the exponent in Hukki's evaluation of these equations led him to conclude that each might well be applicable but only in a relatively narrow size distribution range. He further postulated that the equation of Walker et al. had the wrong form and that the exponent, Hukki did not specify what the function Bond's so-called “Third Theory” equation is normally written as: The work index ( Where plant data are not available, the work index has to be determined from laboratory milling tests. Bond developed rod and ball mill laboratory tests for this purpose. The work indices that they produce are in effect operating work indices and are calculated using feed and product sizes using standard test conditions. It was assumed by Bond that the net energy consumption per revolution of the test mills he used remained constant. Bond also developed laboratory rod mill and crushing tests, each with its own (different) equation for determining the work index. He recommended that the laboratory tests were carried out so that they generated a similar product size to the proposed full-scale circuit. Thus any errors associated with an incorrect exponent were minimised, as the Bond laboratory test procedure and his equation for predicting full-scale performance have the same (incorrect) exponent. This can be shown mathematically by combining When the conditions proposed for the full-scale plant begin to depart significantly from those of the laboratory test, the Bond equation becomes progressively inaccurate. However, Bond introduced a number of correction factors for such situations and these have been expanded and modified over the years If Bond's equation holds, then for a given comminution step, regardless of the feed and product size, the Bond operating work index (OW It is possible that these results could reflect differences in the efficiency of AG/SAG mills compared to ball mills, i.e. ball mills are more efficient than AG/SAG mills. However, a study by Another interpretation of the data in The trend of increasing Bond operating work index as product size increases points to a relationship such as that proposed by Hukki as being more appropriate. However, Hukki's equation, as with Walker's, assumes constant material properties with respect to particle size. As previously stated this has been shown to be incorrect, rock strength typically increasing as size decreases. This phenomenon is attributed to the size and density of pre-existing cracks and imperfections, which reduce as particle size reduces It is proposed that a more complete description of a general form of comminution equation is given by: From a practical viewpoint, one of the problems with Given this situation, it is proposed that an alternative form of equation that relates specific energy to size reduction is given below. The rock breakage properties, as represented by a comminution index The value for The problem still remains as to what form the function The equation which gave the best results is plotted in Using this equation, the mean value of To test the use of The Bond laboratory ball mill work indices are not appropriate for use in The proposed new energy–size relationship uses a variable size exponent in contrast to Bond's fixed value. It will therefore predict different energy requirements to reduce a rock from one size to another. To illustrate the differences, both equations were used to estimate the relative amounts of energy required to progressively reduce a 1 m rock to 100 μm. No correction factors were applied in either case. Without the application of various correction factors, Bond's equation is unlikely to accurately predict the energy requirements in the size range covered by most modern grinding circuits, i.e. −100 mm+0.1 mm. This is particularly true of AG and SAG mill circuits where its predictions are on average in error by 115%. This error is the result of the use of a fixed size exponent of −0.5, the use of which is not supported by experimental data. Available data suggest that a variable size exponent, such as proposed by Hukki, is more appropriate. A new energy–size relationship has been formulated with a variable size exponent. On the basis of available data, this relationship appears not to suffer from the same deficiency as Bond's equation.