Characteristics of the Panum block-and-ash flow (BAF) deposit, Mono Craters, CA, were analyzed to determine the mechanisms of collapse of the parent dome and dynamics of emplacement of the BAF. Granulometry, componentry, and obsidian water content data were used to define distinct facies of the Panum BAF deposit. These suggest a sequential, three-stage collapse model for the ancestral dome of the Panum vent, with destabilization first of its cold, brittle outer margins and then of its hot, ductile interior to an estimated depth of ~260m below the free-air surface.
                  Impact marks on clast faces that resulted from clast-to-clast interactions recorded details of the impacting mechanism. We analyzed ~15,000 marks and report for the first time their size, shape, and sorting to infer the flow regime of the BAF during emplacement, to a distance of ~2.6km from the vent. Clast-to-clast interactions occurred over a broad spectrum from purely collisional (normal to clast faces) to purely frictional (clasts shearing in a unidirectional flow), and recorded a transition to a more frictional flow regime in distal reaches as the sliding head of the BAF decelerated and halted. Finally, we briefly differentiate a similar, but previously undescribed older deposit that predates the 1325–1350A.D. North Mono eruptive episode.Block-and-ash flows (BAFs) are dense granular flows ( Few studies have concentrated on the formation of abrasional marks related to pyroclastic and associated deposits. This contribution focuses on the Panum BAF deposit, Mono Craters, eastern California which extends to the northwest of Panum Crater, covering ~ Given the exceptional range in clast texture, and exposure of different indicators of clast interaction, the Panum BAF deposit presents us with an unusual opportunity to reconstruct the origins and propagation of a Merapi-type block-and-ash flow. This contribution a) explores the origin of separate facies of the Panum BAF deposit in terms of source dome structure and geometry, b) analyzes the componentry of the deposit as it reflects original source dome facies and volumes, c) explores the clast water content, rheology and vesicularity as indicators of possible position (depth) within the original source dome and reaction of the different segments of the dome to depressurization, and most importantly, d) describes and analyzes impact marks on blocks and clast impressions on bombs to elucidate details of the transport of the clasts and emplacement mechanisms. Our main working hypothesis was that the unusual, powdery impact marks found on Panum BAF clasts can be measured to infer transport mechanism, and that this transport mechanism might evolve from relatively dilute collisional flow near a collapsing dome to more concentrated frictional flow at distance from the source as energy dissipated and the flow velocity decreased. The assumption in this work is that relatively equant marks indicate collision of clasts relatively normal to the impacted face, whereas relatively elongated marks indicate frictional shearing of clasts one against another. The implication of this assumption is that normal collisions are consistent with the collisional end-member flow regime, and shearing is consistent with the frictional end-member flow regime. Hence, we consider that the shape of marks occurs along a broad spectrum from equant to highly elongate, reflecting a continuum from the collisional to frictional flow regimes. We also assume that impact marks measured at one outcrop are representative of all clasts deposited at that distance from vent. We are not aware of any previous field based study that analyzed the relationship of impact mark shape and size to the flow regime during emplacement, the evolution of such indicators (and thus flow regime) during the emplacement of natural pyroclastic density currents (PDCs), or analyzed the high number of marks reported here (we report measurements of > In this section, we first briefly present the stratigraphy associated with eruptive activity at Panum Crater in relation to the Panum BAF deposit, followed by descriptions of the distinct facies of the Panum BAF deposit. This section concludes with a description of a (to date undescribed) second, lower coarse pyroclastic deposit to differentiate it from the Panum BAF deposit. The 1325–1350  The first facies extends up to ~ The second facies extends nearly 3 Blocks throughout the BAF facies consistently bear white powdery impact marks on their surfaces ( A coarse pyroclastic breccia lies stratigraphically below the Panum BAF deposit; locally we have found it to underlie the North Mono tephra, and thus it cannot have originated from Panum Crater or any of the eruptive vents of the A.D. 1350 North Mono eruptive episode (base of stratigraphic column, The lower pyroclastic breccia extends beyond the Panum BAF deposit and, at distal locations near Mono Lake, the Panum BAF deposit is absent in outcrops where it was previously mapped by Total water contents of obsidian clasts from the BAF facies were analyzed by Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy at the Laboratoire Magmas et Volcans (Université Blaise Pascal, Clermont-Ferrand, France) to estimate the pressure (i.e. depth) at which they quenched to glass. Obsidians were sampled as they are expected to be the most representative of the eruptive products of the interior of the ancestral dome. At least two clasts from all sampling sites ( Total water contents were calculated by using the method of All obsidians analyzed contain < The estimated quench depths show a trend with final deposited distance from vent ( Impact marks on blocks of the BAF facies were analyzed by using photographs of individual clast faces at locations ~ Image analysis of 19 blocks identified 15,272 individual impact marks, with the following characteristics. On the whole, most impact marks are small relative to the spread of the data, and are not especially elongated. Distally, impact marks decrease in size and increase in sorting, and marks are more elongate at the most distal site sampled ( Interpretations in this section are provided in two subsections. The first concerns the stratigraphic and facies relationships of the Panum BAF deposit and their implications on the collapse dynamics of the ancestral dome that occupied the Panum vent. The second provides interpretations of particle-to-particle interactions during transport and emplacement of the BAF facies.  The two distinct facies of the deposit provide insight into the structure and timing of collapse of the ancestral dome. The flow-banded and jigsaw fractured blocks of the block avalanche facies and the subdued hummocky topography of the deposit suggest that the clasts in the deposit formed the chilled outer carapace of the dome. The jigsaw blocks correlate to domains of shattered edifice rock as seen elsewhere in large-volume debris avalanches (e.g. Insights into dome collapse and resulting flow emplacement can be gained from laboratory experiments of These granular flow relationships are here used to interpret the trend of obsidian quench depth versus final deposited distance from vent within the BAF facies (see The proximal concentration of highly inflated pumices, in concert with under- and overlying deposits that indicate magma fragmentation at the vent (pyroclastic flows with interspersed airfall beds, and the tephra ring around Panum Crater, respectively,  A sequential three-stage collapse model is proposed for the ancestral dome of the Panum vent and the emplacement of the distinct facies of the Panum BAF deposit ( Analysis of the impact marks on blocks of the BAF facies permits estimation of the energy and style of particle-to-particle interactions during transport. Our basic assumptions are that the marks are the result of clast-to-clast impacts, and that the final deposited position of clasts is in relative accord with their place in the flow during emplacement. We interpret the size of impact marks to be proportional to the energy of the impact (and to the shape of the impacting clast, although this hypothesis is untestable here). We interpret the shape (aspect ratio) of the marks to indicate a broad spectrum of impact styles between two end-members, where low aspect ratio (equant) marks result principally from short lived, nearly orthogonal collisional interactions, while high aspect ratio (elongate) marks result principally from longer duration frictional interactions that tend towards parallel orientations as multiple clasts shear against one another in a unidirectional flow. Although rolling of clasts cannot be completely ruled out, the effects of rolling are considered minimal in the generation of impact marks since blocks were sampled throughout the height of the deposit. Impacts creating multiple marks simultaneously cannot be ruled out as well, but we expect such a phenomenon, if regular enough, to generate a preferred orientation of marks, and we see no evidence of this in our data. The solidity value of impact marks may be attributable to a variety of factors; we cautiously use solidity as a simple measure of impact mark overprinting, although it certainly also depends on the mechanical response of blocks to individual impacts. Assuming that an ideal single impact mark is completely convex (solidity The size of impact marks over the whole deposit reveals that most particle-to-particle interactions were of low energy, relative to the maximum spread of the data ( Clast interactions occurred across a broad spectrum from collisions (approximately normal interactions) to frictional shearing (lower angle interactions). On the whole, most impact marks were relatively equant suggesting more collisional interactions (as reported by The distal increase to a higher fraction of elongate marks suggests a transition to a more frictional flow regime as the sliding flow head decelerated and came to a halt, consistent with video footage of tumbling blocks sliding past and interacting with one another at the front of pyroclastic flows at Soufrière Hills, Montserrat ( The stratigraphic and facies relationships of the deposits associated with Panum Crater indicate that an ancestral dome underwent a sequential, piecewise collapse, resulting in the multiple facies of the single Panum BAF deposit. Following earlier events that emplaced PDC and airfall deposits, the sequence began with the collapse of the cooled outer carapace that resulted in a block avalanche. The hot interior of the dome then gave way, emplacing a block-and-ash flow, with a rapidly expanded, fluidal magma foam being comingled in the deposit at later stages (proximally) as progressively greater depths were tapped within the dome (followed by later events producing the overlying PDC deposits and tephra ring). Similarly, obsidian total water contents (indicating quench depths) suggest that outer dome material was deposited basally and distally, with interior dome material deposited proximally. We have, for the first time, used a large sampling of impact marks to infer details of flow mechanism during emplacement of a BAF. The impact marked blocks of the BAF facies record details of particle-to-particle interactions that provide insights into the energy and style of the interactions. Impacts occur over a broad spectrum from purely collisional to purely frictional interactions, but tend to be more collisional than frictional at early stages of such a coarse and initially rapid and energetic flow. The energy dissipated during clast interactions decreases distally as a function of fining grain size and slowing relative inter-particle velocity. We estimate that relative inter-particle velocities must have been greater than 4 Amanda Hintz, Michael LaGamba, Angela Jayko, Phillip Stokes and Nicole Fontanella are thanked for their field assistance. Nathalie Bolfan-Casanova is thanked for her assistance with FTIR spectroscopy. RD thanks E. Calder and G. Valentine for their constructive criticism and suggested edits of the original manuscript. W. Hildreth and W. Scott are thanked for their thorough reviews and criticisms of an early version of the manuscript, and two anonymous reviewers provided useful reviews and comments. RD was supported by the INVOGE program while at the Laboratoire Magmas et Volcans, UBP. This work was funded in part by