Schmidt hammer hardness values (SHH
                     1, SHH
                     2, and deformation coefficient) are used to determine the performance of large diameter circular saws. The measured Schmidt hammer hardness values are correlated with the physical and mechanical properties of natural stones and areal slab production rates of large diameter circular saws. Two statistical models for prediction of the areal slab production rates for these machines are developed, which is very important in decision making for engineers. A simple statistical model is suggested taking into account the deformation coefficient and a multiple regression model is also suggested by using the deformation coefficient and Cerchar abrasivity index. The reliability of these models is tested against actual performance of large diameter saws. Verifications and comparisons showed that the models suggested in this study may be a very useful and reliable tool for prediction of areal slab production rates for large diameter circular saws.Large diameter circular saws (LDCS) have been widely used in the natural stone processing plants in order to produce slabs in different sizes. LDCS, among other machines used in the natural stone processing plants, achieve excellent production performance with minimum cost, with only operator. The surface of the slabs cut by a LDCS is neat and shaping is not required. However, they also have some limitations, which generally arise from geotechnical features of the stone. Selection of a suitable machine and its performance generally depends on the physical and mechanical properties of the stone, machines characteristics, saw properties, penetration rate, and tool consumption. Machine performance directly affects the planning of the plants and the cost estimation of the producing companies. Burgess Schmidt hammers (SH) have been used throughout the world as a nondestructive compressive strength estimating machine. The SH is a portable, cost effective instrument capable of estimating the rock properties with several advantages over traditional rock testing methods. SHs are available from their original manufacturers in several different energy ranges. These include: Type L with 0.735 Many research studies using the SH have been carried out by rock engineers in order to estimate the intact rock mass properties and the performance of mechanical excavators (roadheaders and impact hammers). Hucka Researchers are interested in finding a method to predict the performance of excavation or sawing machines by using rock properties obtained by simple tests. Schmidt hammer hardness is one of the simplest methods giving the surface hardness of the tested material. Although it has been previously demonstrated that Schmidt hammer hardness is related, to some extent, to rock/stone cuttability Block samples with a minimum size of around 25×25×30 The results indicate that density values range from 2.68 to 2.81  Another important rock property, Density and porosity are often related to the strength of the rocks. They are also influenced by the specific gravity of the mineral composition and the compaction of the minerals. Although the importance of density on the estimation of the deformation coefficient obtained from the Shore scleroscope was previously mentioned in  The sawing performance and life of a diamond segmented circular saw depend on many factors. Some of these factors can be explained as: the physical and mechanical properties of the stone, mineralogical and petrographical properties of the stone, the depth of cut, the peripheral speed of the saw, the advance rate, diamond and matrix properties, cooling efficiency, the machine conditions and power, the operator’s skill, etc. All these parameters indicate the complexity of the system and make the performance prediction an extremely hard task. Different natural stone processing plants were visited in Turkey in order to measure the slab production performance of large diameter circular saws (LDCS) and obtain samples. Operational conditions, machine specifications, and sawing performance of LDCS were recorded. All the machines used in this study are four-footed LDCS. Diamond segmented saws used in sawing process have diameters of 1200, 1400, and 1600 In the visited natural stone processing plants, the saws cut the stone blocks in a given depth of cut (30 Since peripheral speed varies with characteristics of the stone to be cut, proper sawing speed must be determined for each material individually. A very low speed results in segments becoming dull, preventing the saw from cutting. On the other hand, a very high speed causes diamond particles to burn or break-out. In both cases, saw blade’s life decreases considerably. The revolutions per minute (rpm) of the saw, given in Simple regression is the simplest form of regression analysis involving one independent variable and one dependent variable in which the relationship between the variables is approximated by a straight line. In this study, simple regression analysis is carried out to find relations between areal slab production rate ( The relationships between The relationship between As seen in The importance of simple regression analysis for predicting the sawability performance of large diameter circular saws have been mentioned by researchers. Gunaydin et al. Multiple regression analysis is more amenable to ceteris paribus analysis because it allows researchers to explicitly control many other factors that simultaneously affect the dependent variables. Multiple regression models can accommodate many explanatory variables that may be correlated, researchers can hope to infer causality in cases where simple regression analysis would be misleading. Due to this reason, multiple regression analysis was performed to determine the relationships between areal slab production rate ( In the literature, precise models were developed by researchers using neural network and fuzzy models. Kahraman et al. The performance prediction of a large diameter circular saw (LDCS) plays a major role in decision making for engineers, and the sawability of natural stones is the key factor in performance prediction. Instead of relying on only one method, using different approaches may improve the reliability of predictions and confidence of the decision makers. As stated by researchers, the models including more variables are not useful due to the complexity and impracticality. Therefore, in this study, practical equations including one and two variables are developed by using regression analysis. A simple regression model (Eq. A summary of the results of the actual and predicted The purpose of this study is to identify and discuss the efficiency of Schmidt hammer hardness ( Deformation coefficient ( It is concluded that the most important physical and mechanical properties of natural stones affecting the sawing performance of large diameter circular saws are deformation coefficient and Cerchar abrasivity index. Two statistical models are suggested by using these properties. The simple regression model based on deformation coefficient is statistically verified and proved to be a very useful and reliable tool for prediction of areal slab production rate of large diameter circular saws. The multiple regression model based on deformation coefficient and Cerchar abrasivity index is also statistically verified and proved to be a very useful and reliable tool for prediction of areal slab production rates for large diameter circular saws. Operator’s effect on the sawing performance and life of a diamond segmented circular saw should be further investigated in future. This study should be improved by adding other types of natural stones and parameters, especially textural and micro-properties, for a more reliable scientific generalization. 