The steady-state free-fall conditions of isolated groups of ordered packed spheres moving through Newtonian fluids have been studied experimentally. Measurements of the drag coefficients are reported in this paper for six different geometrical shapes, including isometric, axisymmetric, orthotropic, plane and elongated conglomerates of spheres. From these measurements, a new and accurate empirical correlation for the drag coefficient, C
                     D, of variously shaped particles has been developed. This correlation has been formulated in terms of the Reynolds number based on the particle nominal diameter, Re, the ratio of the surface-equivalent-sphere to the nominal diameters, d
                     A/d
                     n, and the particle circularity, c. The predictions have been tested against both the experimental data for C
                     D collected in this study and the ones reported in previous works for cubes, rectangular parallelepipeds, tetrahedrons, cylinders and other shapes. A good agreement has been observed for the variously shaped agglomerates of spheres as well as for the regularly shape particles, over the ranges 0.15<Re<1500, 0.80<d
                     A/d
                     n<1.50 and 0.4<c<1.0.The settling behavior for variously shaped particles is of fundamental importance since natural and artificial solid particles occur in almost any shape ranging from roughly spherical pollen and fly ash through cylindrical asbestos fibers to irregular mineral particles. Irregularly shaped particles are met in many applications, such as sedimentation and flocculation of aggregates of fine particles in rivers and lakes, chemical blending, mineral processing, powder sintering, manufacturing with phase change and solidification processes. In most of these applications, the determination of the falling velocity of the particle is of interest for the design and optimization of processes and equipment. Since the falling velocity of a particle depends greatly on its drag coefficient, reliable correlations for the drag coefficient of these irregular particles are required for the understanding of the processes and the design of equipment. Early investigations focused on the drag force experienced by spheres moving through a fluid. Extensive sets of data were collected and combined with theoretical work. The sets of data resulted in several empirical correlations for the drag coefficient, The studies on the drag of irregular particles mainly addressed a limited number of solid shapes and, in most cases, formulated the particle free-falling velocity and drag with respect to a well defined particle shape. A number of empirical correlations were proposed for regular polyhedrons by Pettyjohn and Christiansen It is generally recognized and experiments have shown that the departure of a particle from the spherical shape causes a decrease of its terminal velocity in a fluid. This implies a higher The primary objective of this study is to provide a reliable correlation for the drag coefficient that covers as many shapes as possible of the infinite set of the shapes of the irregularly shaped particles. The irregular particles are made of ordered arrangements of several smaller spheres joined together. Thus, isometric, axisymmetric, orthotropic, plane and longitudinal agglomerates of spheres were examined. The terminal velocities of these irregular particles were measured by an optical method in glycerin–water solutions of different concentration and viscosity, and, hence, their steady-state drag coefficients were determined. From the results obtained, we modified the well-known steady-state correlation for the drag coefficient of spheres in an infinite fluid The drag force, In In this study, we will use this expression for the drag coefficient for spheres. For non-spherical particles in an infinite medium, it was generally recognized that A similar parameter may be defined in terms of the projected area of the sphere, The ratio In similar manner and in order to account for the particle elongation, axisymmetrical shapes were conveniently described by their aspect ratio, Another dimensionless number that is useful in studies of spheroids and ellipsoids is the particle sphericity, The sphericity is generally recognized to be an appropriate single dimensionless number measure for characterizing the shape of isometric non-spherical particles Another approach for characterizing the shape of three-dimensional irregular particles, while bypassing the difficulty in determining their surface area, is to define dimensionless numbers based on the largest, intermediate and shortest particle axes. This approach was adopted by McNown and Malaika One important feature of It appears that a combination of several shape factors may be necessary to properly describe the effect of the shape of a particle on the hydrodynamic drag coefficient. After studying the effect of all the above shape factors on the drag coefficient, we found out that the particle volume, projected area, flatness and circularity are well-characterized by the nominal diameter, Two approaches for the determination of the steady-state drag force on a particle may be found in the literature. The first and most widely used is based on the diameter and the projected area of an equivalent-volume-sphere. The second approach is to calculate the drag force by considering the actual projected surface area of the irregular particle The ratio We conducted experiments for the determination of the terminal velocity of irregular particles and the calculation of the drag force exerted on them. Experiments were conducted in a 1.85-m-long, 12.7-cm inner diameter, Plexiglas, cylindrical tank with the lower end sealed. Water–glycerin solutions of different concentrations and viscosities were used as the fluid. The high-dynamic viscosities were measured by means of a Cannon–Fenske viscometer with distilled water as the reference fluid, while the intermediate and low viscosities were determined by using the falling ball method. Comparisons with the results on the viscosity of the fluid and published tables of the viscosity as a function of the composition of the water–glycerin mixture showed excellent agreement. The fluid was loaded into the tube at least 24 h prior to the experiments, thereby allowing any air bubbles to exit the liquid and for thermal equilibrium to be reached. Experiments were performed at atmospheric pressure and at the controlled laboratory temperature. One of the challenges was to ensure uniformity of temperature in the long tube, because the viscosity of the fluid is a strong function of the temperature. This uniformity of temperature was assured by having a fan blowing in the direction of the tube, thus ensuring that there is no stratification of the air in the laboratory. Regular measurements of the temperature and the viscosity assured that the properties of the fluid were uniform during the experiments. The particles used in the experiments were made from an ordered assembly of several identical smooth glass spheres glued together. Six different geometrical shapes were examined: spherical, pyramidal, star-shaped, H-shaped, cross-shaped and cylindrical (bar). These shapes are shown in Since some of the particle shapes, such as the pyramidal and the spherical, were constructed by putting together small spheres, the solid particles formed are essentially porous. We performed an analytical test by using the permeability function developed by Brinkman The agglomerated composite particles were let free into the liquid at the center of the cross-section and beneath the free surface with the help of a pair of tweezers. In the case of the asymmetric shapes, an initial series of settling experiments were performed in order to determine the vertical orientation of the agglomerates in the settling process. These tests showed that, for The terminal velocities were measured using a high-speed video camera of high resolution with the CCD captor sensor discerning 256 grey levels. The camera takes 500 frames/s, with an exposure time of 1/500 s. Whenever we found that the agglomerated particles exhibited unsteady oscillatory motion (at very high The experimental data of the drag coefficient, First, agglomerates that have a near-spherical shape showed the lowest drag coefficients and their drag curves were always close to those of the spheres. The external shape of these particles was close-to-sphere with a corrugated outer surface. Second, at a given Third, the experimental data for the cylinder and star-shaped agglomerates exhibited drag coefficients between those of spheres and the shapes mentioned in the previous paragraph. The only exception to this was observed at Following the trends observed in In order to express the deviation of the projected area of the particle from that of a disk, we included the parameter of circularity, The corresponding set of data for each conglomerate shapes examined is shown in From   Within the range of validity of The measured and predicted drag coefficients vs. the Reynolds number are plotted in We have also tested the derived correlation It must be pointed out that, in our experiments with agglomerates, this unstable settling process was observed occasionally for 50< We also compared the drag coefficients obtained by Laboratory measurements were conducted to determine the terminal velocity of irregularly shaped agglomerates of spheres. The drag coefficients were subsequently calculated and reported. The experimental error of the measurements was considerably lower than that of previous studies. From these measurements and several optimization tests with different functional forms, we derived a simple but accurate correlation for the drag coefficients of irregular particles, which is shown in The proposed correlation is valid in the ranges of variables 0.15< This research effort was partly supported by a grant by the ONR to the Tulane/Xavier Center for Bioenvironmental Research, for which the authors are thankful.