Introduction
                  The aims of this study were to (1) describe the use of the K-wire for the initial management of high-energy Lisfranc dislocations or fracture dislocations, (2) to evaluate whether this standalone technique allowed for adequate reduction of these injuries, (3) to evaluate whether reductions were maintained until definitive fixation was performed, (4) and to determine if it contributed to any increase in complications prior to or after definitive fixation.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A retrospective review was performed on all patients who presented with tarsometatarsal injuries from January 2005 through June 2015. Dislocations of the tarso-metatarsal joints were classified as either Type A (total incongruity, homolateral complex), Type B (partial incongruity, homolateral incomplete) or Type C (divergent, total or partial displacement) patterns, with or without associated fractures. For the purposes of this paper, high-energy injuries were defined as patients presenting with either a Type A or Type C (total displacement) dislocations or fracture-dislocation patterns. A total of 176 patients presented with a tarsometatarsal injury. Eighteen patients with divergent or homolateral patterns underwent a staged approach. Fifteen patients were managed exclusively with K-wire fixation. Wound complications, infections or the unexpected need to return to surgery were recorded.
               
                  Results
                  All patients demonstrated an improved alignment using K-wires. There were no compartment syndromes, vascular insufficiency, complications to the skin associated with traction or manipulation, or pin site infections. At definitive fixation, no patient demonstrated a loss in the alignment that had been obtained at the index procedure or had an unexpected return to surgery.
               
                  Discussion and conclusions
                  This study demonstrates that high-energy Lisfranc injuries are uncommon and that K-wires are a simple and adequate technique that can be used for initial staged approach of these injuries. The use of 2.0mm K-wires were sufficient to obtain and maintain the reduction until definitive fixation has been obtained, without producing any increase risk for complications.Injuries involving the tarsometatarsal (Lisfranc) joint are uncommon, accounting for only 0.2% of bony injuries and are seen in about one in 55,000 people per year. Although, it is well documented that a precise anatomic reduction is important for optimum results, The goals of these staged procedures are to improve the axial alignment of the extremity, rather than obtaining an anatomic reduction. This then permits one to wait until the soft tissue envelope has improved and also allows adjunctive tests to be performed to better delineate bone and joint injuries. Most staged procedures, addressing high-energy Lisfranc injuries, have been addressed using some type of external fixation, placed either medially or laterally (unicolumnar) or on both sides (bicolumnar) of the foot. Our hypotheses were that standalone K-wire fixation, used for the initial staged management of high-energy Lisfranc fracture and fracture-dislocations, worked equally as well as external fixation. In order to gauge the success of K-wire fixation, the aims of this study were to (1) describe the use of the K-wire for the initial management of high-energy Lisfranc dislocations or fracture dislocations, (2) to evaluate whether this standalone technique allowed for adequate reduction of these injuries, (3) to evaluate whether reductions were maintained until definitive fixation was performed, (4) and to determine if the k-wires contributed to any increase in complications prior to or after definitive fixation. After obtaining approval through the Institutional Review Board (#103998), a retrospective review was performed on all patients who presented with tarsometatarsal injuries from January 2005 through June 2015. Dislocations of the tarso-metatarsal joints were classified according to Myerson et al. A total of 176 patients were identified with a tarsometatarsal injury. Eighteen patients (10%) with high-energy injuries underwent a staged approach. Three patients managed using external fixation were excluded leaving fifteen patients with fifteen Lisfranc injuries that were managed exclusively with K-wire fixation on initial presentation. ( At the time of initial presentation, all patients underwent a closed reduction of their fractures and fracture-dislocations in the operating room. Tourniquets were applied as a precaution but were not inflated. Anticipating future surgical incisions, care was taken to place pins away from these sites. Utilizing finger traps or RAY-TEC sponges (Johnson and Johnson, Dublin, Ohio, U.S.A), longitudinal traction to the toes and manual pressure to the midfoot (to correct dorsal or plantar dislocations) was applied. Intraoperative fluoroscopy was used to demonstrate that an improvement to the alignment of the foot had been obtained, defined as some minimal subluxation but no dislocations. If the reduction was difficult to obtain with traction or manipulation alone, a K-wire was used as a “joystick” to push the metatarsal or cuneiform into an adequate position and was then advanced into a stable area of the mid- or hindfoot. Once improvement was noted on fluoroscopy, stabilization of the midfoot was achieved using three or four 2.0 Fourteen of the fifteen patients (93%) completed the staged protocol and ultimately underwent definitive fixation. Transportation issues occurred in two patients resulting in a delay in transfer (120 No patient sustained complications to the skin of the toes or the midfoot associated with traction or manipulation during the initial reduction. During subsequent clinic visits no pin sites demonstrated drainage, erythema or cellulitis. No loosening or loss of pins was noted from their initial placement to the time of definitive fixation. In addition, fluoroscopic evaluation at the time of definitive fixation demonstrated no loss in the alignment that had been obtained with the index procedure. No patients had an unexpected return to surgery but two patients did developed wound problems, both after their definitive fixation had been performed. The first developed a wound dehiscence and the second a superficial infection. Both were treated non-operatively and went on to completely heal their wounds. The one patient with the open injury underwent multiple debridements and ultimately required a free tissue transfer for coverage of the foot. The only patient who did not return to surgery for definitive fixation had significant mental health (psychoses) issues. Due to prolonged absences, persistent non-compliance and his family’s request, pins were pulled at approximately nine weeks and no further surgeries were performed. Injuries to the tarsometatarsal joint occur infrequently. Those presenting with a high-energy Lisfranc injury are even more uncommon, identified in only ten percent of our patient population. These high-energy injuries present with significant disruption of the bony anatomy and can compromise the soft tissue envelope of the foot. When identified, a prompt reduction of these injuries improves the alignment and relieves the pressure to the surrounding soft tissues, avoids the potential for skin necrosis, helps avert the development of a compartment syndrome, prevents compromise to the neurovascular structures and allows a safe waiting period to be undertaken until the swelling has decreased, re-epitheliazation of blisters has occurred and “wrinkling of the skin” has been noted. Based on outcomes associated with the acute management of other high-energy lower extremity injuries, For these injuries the use of an external fixator, applied to one or both sides of the foot, has been well described and has been shown to be a valuable tool in the acute management of both the bony instability and the compromised soft tissue envelope. An alternative, simpler, option is the use of K-wire fixation. Some advantages for using this technique are that, unlike external fixators, K-wires are readily available in almost all institutions. Secondly, most hospitals have different sizes available, which may be advantageous when treating smaller patients. Third, the use of smaller diameter pins may minimize articular damage. There are however, some limitations to this study. First, in the presence of significant comminution to the cuneiforms, navicular or cuboid, the adjunctive use of external fixator may be necessary in order to obtain and maintain columnar length of the foot. Secondly, it may be difficult to adequately place pins in patients presenting with open injuries. Although one patient in this study presented as an open grade 3 B injury, the wound was fortuitously not in a location that precluded the use of this technique or interfered with the need for subsequent irrigations and debridements. This may not be true in other patients. Third, all patients were taken to surgery as soon as they arrived at our emergency department. Although two patients were pinned 120 In conclusion, the use of K-wire fixation, as a standalone method of fixation for the acute management of high-energy Lisfranc injuries, appears to be a simple, adequate technique. These implants are readily available in most institutions, avoiding the need for external fixation. Complications, from traction to the toes or manipulation of the fractures and dislocation, and the occurrence of pin site infections did not occur in this study. Pins can easily be placed away from incisional sites that will be used for definitive reconstruction and can also be used to help realign central dislocations of the midfoot, which may not be able to be adequately managed with columnar external fixation. The results also demonstrated that the use of 2.0 No funding was received in support of this study. The authors have no conflicts of interest for this manuscript.