Ankle fractures have been widely described in orthopedic and podiatric studies. These injuries have been associated with significant patient morbidity, infection, malunion, nonunion, and arthritis. Avoiding complications and optimizing outcomes demands an awareness of the factors affecting the healing of ankle fractures. The prognosis of surgical treatment of these injuries has varied according to patient factors or injury severity, or a combination. Cigarette smoking, obesity, and diabetes are some of the factors linked to the prognosis of ankle fractures. We conducted a retrospective cohort study of 58 patients treated for an ankle fracture at a single center. The objective of the present study was to comprehensively evaluate the factors affecting the clinical outcome of surgically treated ankle fractures.Significant fractures of the fibula and/or tibia (excluding small avulsion fractures) can be associated with disruption of the ankle mortise. Ankle fractures are common injuries and often lead to prolonged periods of immobilization, disability, and frustrating delays in returning to normal activities. They comprise a diverse group of injuries that include proximal fibular fractures, syndesmotic injuries, bimalleolar, trimalleolar, and isolated malleolar fractures. The standard treatment of displaced ankle fractures in the general population is open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF) The institutional review board of the Western Pennsylvania Hospital approved the present study. The charts of 60 patients who had sustained an ankle fracture (“International Classification of Disease, 9th revision,” codes 824.0-824.9) and had undergone subsequent ORIF from April 2007 to August 2009 (28 months) were retrospectively reviewed. The potentially eligible patient records included in the cohort had to indicate that the patient had undergone ORIF for the ankle fracture and include the radiographic assessment and the following: age, cigarette smoking The patient characteristics were collected from the medical records by 2 of us (N.D., A.R.). The original data collection process gathered an extensive list of variables. However, for a more comprehensive statistical analysis of 60 patients, the variables were limited to 5 independent variables (i.e., age, smoker status, presence of peripheral neuropathy, fracture type, and presence of dislocation) and 5 dependent (outcome) variables (i.e., interval to return to regular activities, duration of immobilization, interval to radiographic evidence of healing, presence of nonunion/malunion, and wound/fracture healing complications). After consideration of the clinical, operative, and radiographic reports, the ankle fractures were classified as isolated fibular, proximal fibular, bimalleolar, or trimalleolar. Comorbidities were considered present if reported in the patient’s history or records from other services that pertained to the patient’s medical status at the ankle fracture. The follow-up examinations recorded the interval to return to regular activities, radiographic evidence of healing, duration of immobilization, evidence of wound healing complications, and evidence of nonunion/malunion. A statistical description of the cohort was undertaken, and tests of the null hypothesis were also performed. The initial analysis used multiple contingency table Fisher’s exact chi-square nonparametric tests to analyze 20 different variables. The results did not offer a comprehensive analysis for the cohort size; therefore, additional analysis was undertaken of the 5 independent and 5 dependent (outcome) variables. The revised analyses were performed using SPSS, version 17 (SPSS, Chicago, IL). The independent variables (i.e., age, smoker status, presence of diabetic peripheral neuropathy, fracture type, presence of dislocation) and outcome variables (interval to until return to regular activities, duration of immobilization, interval to radiographic evidence of healing, presence of nonunion/malunion, and wound healing complications, including infection) were analyzed ( The original data set (using the “International Classification of Disease, 9th revision,” codes 824.0-824.9) yielded 97 potentially eligible patients. However, only 60 patients met the inclusion criteria. Final exclusion from the present study was determined on the basis of extreme outliers in the category and fewer than 50 patients for each variable. The patient demographics and the numbers for each subcategory are listed in The The duration of immobilization was not recorded for 2 patients, and the data from 1 patient was excluded because it was an extreme outlier ( The interval to return to everyday activities was not recorded for 7 patients, leaving 53 patients for the final subgroup analysis. A main effect was observed for fracture type [F (1, 36) = 5.12, Binomial logistic regression analysis was conducted to determine the extent to which age, cigarette smoking, neuropathy, fracture type, and dislocation predicted for suboptimal union. A total of 58 patients were included in this final subgroup analysis, after removal of 2 because of missing data. All the predictor variables were simultaneously entered into the model. Combined, the predictor variables were unrelated to osseous healing or union [G Binomial logistic regression analysis was also conducted to determine the extent to which age, cigarette smoking, neuropathy, fracture type, and dislocation predicted wound complications. A total of 59 patients were included in this final subgroup analysis, after the removal of 1 because of missing data. All the predictor variables were simultaneously entered into the model. Combined, the predictor variables were marginally related to the development of wound complications [G Egol et al In the present study, a number of primary effects were found in regard to ankle fractures. Specifically, we found that patients with diabetic neuropathy were 7.63 times more likely to experience a wound complication than those with uncomplicated (no history of peripheral neuropathy) diabetes. Wound complications were also 14.29 times more common in those with trimalleolar ankle fractures than those with bimalleolar fractures. Fracture site or anatomic involvement (trimalleolar, bimalleolar, and other ankle fractures) and injury type (open versus closed) influenced the outcomes in our study. Specifically, functional outcomes were poorer with open injuries, and this was consistent with previously published findings The initial statistical analysis yielded results that were not representative of a comprehensive depiction of the 60 patients (substantial data were missing); therefore, the analyses were limited to 5 independent and dependent variables. From our findings, a number of conclusions were made. First, patients with diabetic neuropathy were 7.63 times more likely to experience a wound complication than were patients with diabetes without neuropathy. Second, wound complications were more common in those with trimalleolar ankle fractures than in those with bimalleolar fractures. Third, patients with dislocated ankles required longer immobilization than did those without ankle dislocation. Finally, patients with trimalleolar fractures took longer to return to everyday activities than did those with bimalleolar fractures. Although we believe this information can be useful to surgeons treating patients with ankle fractures, we acknowledge certain limitations of our investigation. First, direct access to the patients to ascertain injury severity (fracture blisters or other cutaneous compromise, stress instability, and comminution) was not feasible for all of us. Furthermore, radiographic assessment of fracture healing was routinely performed by 1 of the attending physicians and was therefore not standardized. Moreover, we had also treated the patients whose data were analyzed, and other biases were likely in effect from the “International Classification of Disease, 9th revision” coding information, and the decisions to omit patients from certain analyses because of the lack of certain data. In conclusion, despite these methodologic shortcomings, we believe that the results of our investigation can be used in the development of future randomized controlled trials and prospective cohort studies. The goal of our study was to provide a comprehensive analysis of the factors affecting the healing after ankle fracture surgery and how this affects the clinical course. To our knowledge, no studies exist that have investigated such a diverse variety of clinical outcomes. The authors acknowledge Clint R. Irvin, PhD, for his statistical analyses and assistance with data interpretation.