Although coal–gas interactions have been comprehensively investigated, fewer studies consider the impact of thermal effects. In this study, a fully coupled model of coal deformation, gas transport, and thermal transport is developed and solved using the finite element method. A general model is developed to describe the evolution of coal porosity under the combined influence of gas pressure, thermally induced solid deformation, thermally induced gas adsorption change, and gas-desorption-induced solid deformation. This porosity-evolution relationship is implemented into a fully coupled model for coal deformation, gas transport, and thermal transport using the finite element (FE) model. The FE model represents important nonlinear responses due to the effective stress effects that cannot be recovered where mechanical influences are not rigorously coupled with the gas and the thermal transport systems. The controlling effects of gas pressure, temperature and gas sorption on these nonlinear responses of coal porosity and permeability to gas production are quantified through a series of simulations. It is found that the gas-desorption-induced deformation is the most important factor that controls these nonlinear responses. In this work, among the factors such as thermal expansion of solid and gas, and convective heat flux, in addition to the thermal diffusion, the heat sink due to thermal dilatation of gas is most prominent factor in altering the temperature of coal seam. This conclusion demonstrates that the thermal impact on coal–gas interactions cannot be neglected especially where the temperature is high.Advances in our understanding of coal–gas interactions have changed the manner in which we treat coalbed methane: from mitigating its dangers as a mining hazard to developing its potential as an unconventional gas resource recovered as a useful by-product of CO From the 1970s onwards there has been a growing interest in the production of coalbed methane as a fuel. This has now evolved from a little-known resource with high operational costs to a competitive mainstream natural gas resource ( When coal is recovered by mining, or fluid recovered or injected, the geothermal equilibrium in the subsurface system is disturbed. As a result of this disturbance, complex interactions of stress and physical chemistry are affected by thermal transport (e.g., Gas migration in coal seams is a process associated with coal seam deformation, gas slippage and absorption-induced matrix shrinkage of coal, as well as thermal transfer. To properly account for the response, these coupled processes bust be evaluated together, to evaluate appropriate feedbacks within this complex and interactive system. This problem is complex because the related physical processes are at PVT (pressure, volume and temperature) conditions where feedbacks between physical process and activation of chemical effects are strong and nonlinear. There are a variety of interactive effects. Effective stress is the first and probably most important factor that influences the evolution of gas permeability in coal seams. An increase in gas pressure results in a decrease in effective stress, which in turn results in the dilation of coal cleats and in a concomitant increase in coal permeability ( Geothermal gradients in the subsurface sometimes exceed the normal 25 High temperature favors the existence of gas in a free state rather than as sorbed to the matrix. At higher temperatures the Langmuir constant decreases, resulting in a lower initial slope of the isotherm ( Successful prediction of the response of coal seams to production relies on understanding the interaction of these complex factors. The potentially strong feedbacks between processes results in modeling being the only practical method of following the response. Currently, most models have ignored the influence of temperature on the response of the coal seams to gas recovery. In this study, we define this chain of reactions, trigged by coal mining, coalbed extraction, or CO We develop the mathematical representation for the coupled thermal transport, gas flow and geomechanical response to gas flow in coal. Necessary relations include the enforcement of conservation of momentum, mass and energy with appropriate constitutive laws for fluid and heat transport and for stress and deformation. There is no explicit representation in the model of any additional fracturing because the formulations are based on a representative element volume (REV) within the coal seam. The coal seam is assumed to behave as a linear elastic medium relative to anticipated changes in stress, as induced by methane production. Temperature changes may induce changes in porosity, which is directly analogous to matrix shrinkage in coalbeds where porosity increases as gas desorbs during drawdown ( The macroscopic volumetric matrix shrinkage strain Based on Eq. Using compact notation, the equations of equilibrium and the strain-displacement relations can be expressed as In the absence of pore gas pressure, temperature gradients and desorption-induced matrix shrinkage strain The coal seam is composed of a solid matrix that contains interstitial pore space filled with a freely diffusing pore gas. The absorption or desorption of gas may occur when the gas pressure and porosity of the coal seam are changed. Gas flow in a porous medium is governed by a mass balance equation Based on the Langmuir isotherm under different temperature, the gas absorption volume The ideal gas law is used to describe the relation between gas density, gas pressure and temperature as Based on Eq. Assuming that the effect of gravity is small in comparison to the induced pressure gradient, the Darcy velocity, As previously defined ( Considering the initial state with a mean compressive stress within the coal seam of Substituting Eq. Based on Eq. In addition, the coal permeability is assumed to vary with porosity as Considering In this respect, the simplification from Eqs. Substituting Eqs. By neglecting the thermal-filtration effect, the total heat flux The first term on the left-hand side of Eq. Assuming constant specific heats ( As given by Based on Eq. Substituting Eqs. Eqs. Considering (1 Different physical processes generally progress at different rates. Thermal processes are rather slow due to the high heat capacity of the solid; gas processes progress relatively faster in fractures and significantly slower in the intact solid. The propagation rate of elastic stresses may be treated as spontaneous when compared with these timescales. The above governing equations, especially the gas flow equation and energy conservation equation are nonlinear second-order partial differential equations (PDEs) in space and first order in time. These equations are not easy to solve theoretically due to the nonlinearity in both the space and time domain, therefore they are implemented into COMSOL Multiphysics ( A representative model geometry is shown in A total of four scenarios (scenarios I, II, III and IV as listed in Furthermore, five scenarios, V–IX as listed in Compared with the gas-pressure-induced porosity changes of scenario I alone, the change of porosity in scenario II is caused by both the gas pressure and temperature gradients. The distribution of porosity and gas pressure radially outwards from the wellbore under scenarios I and II are shown in As shown in The coal seam expands with the elevation in temperature, however, because deformation is restrained due to confinement of the external boundary, the resultant compressive stress and strain to reduce the permeability of the coal seam. With the progress in gas drainage, temperature of the coal seam declines gradually, abating the temperature-induced effect and leading to an increase in permeability of the coal seam. Variations of porosity and gas pressure with distance from the wellbore under scenarios II and III are shown in As shown in Similar to As shown in  When a higher gas pressure of 8 As shown in A fully coupled model representing coal deformation, gas transport and thermal transport is developed and implemented. The model is applied to examine the complex coal–gas interactions under variable temperatures. Based on the results of a series of numerical simulations under different scenarios, the following conclusions are drawn: A general porosity model is proposed to represent coal seams, which accommodates the influences of gas pressure, thermally induced solid deformation, thermally induced gas adsorption and gas-desorption-induced solid deformation. The model can characterize the evolution of porosity during fully coupled gas flow, geomechanics and heat transfer processes. Under the boundary and initial conditions specified in this work, the gas-desorption-induced deformation is more salient than the other three factors in affecting the porosity. In this work, among the factors of thermal expansion of the solid and the gas, convective heat flux, in addition to the thermal diffusion, the heat sink due to thermal dilatation of gas is the most prominent factor in altering the temperature of the coal seam. In this respect, the temperature variation is the most comprehensive contribution of all above-mentioned factors. In this respect, in order to evaluate gas flow correctly and to clarify the mechanisms associated with coupled coal–gas interaction during gas flow in coal seams, it is of paramount importance to take the all the related factors into account in the numerical simulations. It should also be noted that, in this work, the coal seam is still assumed elastic. The effects of mining-induced damage, as well as its contribution to fully coupled processes, remain to be quantified. This work was funded by the National Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 50874024, 50934006, 50911140284 and 51010105043), the National Basic Research Program (“973 Program”) of China (Grant No. 2007CB209405), the Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation (Grant No.122023), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (Grant Nos. N090501001, N090101001, N100701001 and N100601004). This support is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are grateful to the reviewers for discerning comments on this paper.