Modification of the recently developed creep-resistant Mg-3Gd-2Ca (wt.%) magnesium alloy using Nd and Mn remarkably improved the creep resistance at both 180 
                        °C
                      and 210 
                        °C
                     . The modified Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca-0.5Mn alloy after solid solution treatment exhibited outstanding creep resistance that is superior to the commercial creep-resistant Mg alloy, EV31, but contained less RE addition. The microstructural observations revealed that partial replacement of Gd with 1 wt% Nd did not enhance the effect of dynamic precipitates significantly. But further analysis by atom probe tomography verified the stronger co-segregation between Nd solute atoms and other solute atoms than that of Gd and Ca in the Mg solid solutions, leading to a higher solid solution strengthening effect on the creep resistance. The addition of 0.5 wt% Mn led to the formation of polygonal-shape α-Mn precipitates, which served as heterogeneous nucleants for dynamic precipitates, refining their size and increasing the number densities. As a result, the creep properties of newly developed Mg alloys were strengthened by a combination of improved solid solution strengthening by Nd and increased precipitation hardening by Mn addition.As the lightest structural metal, magnesium and its alloys have attracted increasing interest in weight-critical applications, especially in automotive and aerospace industries as these sectors pursue fuel efficiency and energy conservation [ To completely eliminate the negative influence of Al, recent research has focused on searching alternative systems, including Mg-RE [ One of the most feasible solutions is to investigate the combined effect of RE with other low-cost alloying elements to compensate the loss of creep strength due to the reduction in RE content. For example, binary Mg–Gd alloys show little precipitation hardening effect once the Gd addition was less than 10 wt% [ More recently, Ca addition has been recognized as another potential replacement of REs to retain the high creep resistance of Mg alloys. Xu et al. [ However, an issue noticed in the Mg-3Gd-2Ca alloy (wt.%) is that despite Ca solute exhibited good solid solution strengthening effect comparable to Gd solutes, its subsequent precipitates, Mg As the optimal creep performance is achieved under solid solution treated condition, the present work aims to investigate the effect of the combined additions of Nd and Mn on the creep behaviour of the as-solid solution treated Mg-3Gd-2Ca (wt.%) alloy system, and to understand the mechanisms based on microstructural examinations by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atom probe tomography (APT). Three alloys with nominal composition of Mg-3Gd-2Ca (wt.%), Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca (wt.%) and Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca-0.5Mn (wt.%) were studied. For convenience, they are designated as #1, #2 and #3, respectively. Pure Mg ingots (purity Based on previous work [ Samples were cut from the ingots and machined into 9 mm in diameter and 18 mm high cylindrical shape for creep testing. Constant-load compressive creep tests were carried out on an ATS Lever Arm Test System at 180 The microstructure was characterized in a Reichert-Jung Polyvar Met optical microscope (OM) and in a JEOL 6610 scanning electron microscope (SEM). Electron probe microscope analysis (EPMA) based on a JEOL PROBE-8200 was conducted at 40 kV and The Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca alloy was further examined using an atom probe tomography (APT). Samples for APT were firstly machined into The as-solid solution treated microstructure of investigated alloys were characterized using optical microscope, as shown in Microstructures of the commercial alloy EV31 after heat treatment were also displayed in  For comparison, creep behaviours of as-solid solution treated (T4) and peak-aged (T6) EV31 alloys were also tested at 210 Typical microstructures upon creep testing at 210 Consisting with previous work [ As to the #3 Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca-0.5Mn alloy, closer inspection by STEM and elemental EDX maps viewed along two directions of Mg matrix (   The GM-SRO program is to examine the local neighbourhood of an atom as a function of radially distance outwards from the atom, and to provide a set of short-range order parameters, α, as the quantitative description of atom distribution in the specimen. A positive value of α is an indicative of co-segregation in crystallographic shells, a negative value indicates anti-segregation of the two types of atom and zero demonstrates the random distribution [ Although the results showing in The results of present work indicated that minor modification by Nd and Mn could achieve a noticeable improvement in the creep resistance of as-solid solution treated Mg-3Gd-2Ca (wt.%) alloy, disclosing the great potential of this new alloy system for the development of low-cost creep-resistant Mg alloys. The role of Nd and Mn additions as discussed based on the microstructural observations respectively. In general, it has been known previously that addition of Nd to heavy rare earth elements (e.g. Gd and Y) containing alloys can reduce their solubility in Mg, shifting the solvus toward lower content level and promoting the precipitation response [ Besides precipitation hardening, the solid solution strengthening is another main approach affecting the mechanical properties of Mg alloys. However, the influence of Nd on the solute distribution within Mg solid solution has never been described as far as the authors aware. Statistical analysis based on atom probe data demonstrated that solutes of Nd, Gd and Ca exhibited preference to co-segregate in a fine scale within the Mg matrix. The Pearson coefficient (μ) based on contingency table was used in present work to describe the degree of atom co-segregation. Results in Further addition of Mn was confirmed to present as fine α-Mn particles in the crept microstructure of the #3 alloy ( Results of present work suggested that the primary role of Mn in the current #3 alloy (Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca-0.5Mn) was associated with the refinement of the Mg It is also worth noting that the number density of dynamic precipitates in the #3 alloy was two orders of magnitude higher than that of the #2 alloy, but the improvement in the creep resistance by Mn addition was not so significant when compared with the effect of Nd addition ( Compressive creep performance at high temperatures of three newly developed Mg alloys have been investigated. Novel understanding about the effect of Nd and Mn additions on creep resistance of Mg alloys have been clarified in present work based on microstructural observations by TEM and APT. Conclusions are drawn as below: As-solid solution treated Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca (wt.%) and Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca-0.5Mn (wt.%) alloys exhibit improved creep resistance than the Mg-3Gd-2Ca (wt.%) alloy tested at both 180 The Mg-2Gd-1Nd-2Ca-0.5Mn alloy shows great potential for applications at elevated temperature because its creep resistance is comparable to that of commercial creep-resistant alloy EV31. In addition to the precipitation hardening due to the formation of Mg The strengthening effect of Mn addition is attributed to the presence of α-Mn precipitates that refined the size and increased the number density and uniformity of Mg The data used to support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon request.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance, of Microscopy Australia at the Australian Centre for Microscopy & Microanalysis(ACMM), The University of Sydney (Sydney Microscopy & Microanalysis). Part of the atom probe analysis was performed on the Atom Probe Workbench of the Characterisation Virtual Laboratory. NM, QT, MB and MXZ would also like to acknowledge to support of the,School of Mechanical and Mining Engineering University of Queensland and the Queensland Centre for Advanced Materials Processing and Manufacturing. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors.