The pre-cracked disk specimens (Brazilian disks containing single and double cracks in the middle part of the disk) of rock-like materials were experimentally tested under compressive line loading. The specimens were prepared from Portland Pozzolana Cement (PPC), fine sands and water. The failure load of the pre-cracked disks was measured, showing the decreasing effects of the cracks and their orientation on the final failure load. The breakage process of the disks was studied by inserting single and double cracks with different inclination angles. It was observed that wing cracks are produced at the first stage of loading, and start their propagation toward the direction of compressive line loading. The same specimens were numerically simulated by an indirect boundary element method known as the displacement discontinuity method. Finally, a numerical simulation was conducted to study the effect of crack length and its orientation on the cracks coalescence and breakage path.The presence of pre-existing cracks may reduce the fracture toughness of brittle materials In a crack propagation process of a brittle material such as pre-cracked rock specimens, usually two types of cracks are observed originating from the original tips of pre-existing cracks – wing cracks and secondary cracks. Wing cracks are usually produced due to tension, whereas secondary cracks may initiate due to shear. Therefore, initiation of wing cracks in rocks is favored relative to secondary cracks because of the lower toughness of these materials in tension than in shear Many experiments have been devoted to study the crack initiation, propagation path, and eventual coalescence of the pre-existing cracks in specimens made of various substances, including natural rocks or rock-like materials under tensile and compressive loadings Various numerical methods have been developed for the simulation of crack propagation in brittle substances, e.g. Finite Element Method (FEM), Boundary Element Method (BEM), Discrete Element Method (DEM) etc. Three important fracture initiation criteria were proposed to study the crack propagation mechanism of brittle materials i.e. (i) the maximum tangential stress ( However, in most of the published investigations usually specimens with a single center crack have been studied. In the present study, the Brazilian disks of rock-like materials containing either single or double cracks in the central part of the specimen are being analyzed both experimentally and numerically. The center single and double cracked disk specimens (prepared from PCC, fine sands and water) tested in a Brazilian Testing Apparatus. The stress and displacement fields, the crack propagation and cracks coalescence through the specimens and in the bridge area (the area in between the two cracks in the specimens containing double cracks) of pre-cracked rock-like disk specimens have been studied both experimentally and numerically. Some of the experiments are simulated numerically by a modified higher order displacement discontinuity method and the crack propagation and cracks coalescence in the bridge area are studied based on Mode I and Mode II stress intensity factors (SIFs). The experimental results are compared with the numerical results which are in good agreement with each other and illustrate the accuracy and validity of the present work. The numerical simulation makes the necessary flexibility in the analysis so that it is readily possible to investigate the effects of crack length and its orientation on the breakage process of pre-cracked disk specimens. The pre-cracked rock-like disk specimens with 100 Various Brazilian tests were conducted on rock-like disk specimens containing either a single crack or two cracks 1 and 2. These cracks were created by inserting one thin metal slim with 30 The disk specimens with double cracks are prepared in such a manner that crack1 is the same as that of single crack (with a constant inclination angle, Three experiments were carried out, and for each experiment, four specimens were prepared. These double cracked disk specimens containing crack 1 and crack 2 located at the centerline of each specimen with the spacing The specially prepared (rock-like) specimens were tested experimentally and the results were used to analyze the failure loads and the crack propagation process of the pre-cracked disk specimens. The crack propagation process of the disk specimens is discussed below, considering the two cases of disk specimens with: (i) single crack and (ii) double cracks. It is obvious that the pre-cracked rock-like disk specimens have a lower strength compared to the un-cracked specimens (specimens having no cracks). The failure load analysis of the pre-cracked disk specimens containing either a single crack or two cracks with different orientations is of paramount important to study the behavior of the brittle materials. The maximum value of load is for the case of perpendicular cracks ( The experimental investigation of pre-cracked rock-like specimens is accomplished considering the two cases: (i) specimen containing a single crack and (ii) specimens containing double cracks. In this research, some experiments have been carried out to study the mechanism of crack initiation and crack propagation in CSCBD specimens with different crack inclination angles. In the single cracked disk specimens, the wing cracks propagated in a curved path, starting their extension from the crack tips and continue their growth in a direction (approximately) parallel to the direction of maximum compressive load (as shown in Cracks coalescence phenomenon may occur when the two pre-existing cracks combine due to propagation of wings and/or secondary cracks (originating from the tips of the pre-existing cracks) in brittle substances under various loadings. As shown in In the current experiments, the wing cracks are instantaneously initiated quasi-statically ( The bridge area may be considered as the area starting from the right tip of a horizontal crack (crack1) to that of the right tip of an inclined crack (crack2) for the cases shown in   A displacement based version of the indirect boundary element method known as the Displacement Discontinuity Method (DDM) originally proposed by Crouch It has been shown that the higher order displacement discontinuity method gives an accurate solution of normal displacement discontinuity (crack opening displacement) and shear displacement discontinuity (crack sliding displacement) near the crack ends based on which the mode I and Mode II stress intensity factors (SIFs) can be estimated In this research, a higher accuracy of the displacement discontinuities along the boundary of the problem is obtained by using quadratic displacement discontinuity (DD) elements is used. A quadratic DD element is divided into three equal sub-elements that each sub-element contains a central node for which the nodal DD is evaluated numerically A modified higher order displacement discontinuity method based on the versatile boundary element method is used for the numerical simulation of the proposed experimental work (i.e. to study the cracks propagation and cracks coalescence in the bridge area of rock-like brittle materials). The CSCBD specimens (already shown in Since the experimental analysis of the crack propagation process of disk specimens is somewhat time-consuming, expensive, difficult and complex, in this study, the numerical simulations of crack propagation process are also accomplished by using the boundary element method. As experimentally shown in the previous section, the crack inclination angle in rock-like specimens has a significant effect on their final breakage. Assessment of breakage process in cracked disk specimens with different crack lengths is considered here. Numerical simulations are accomplished on double-cracked disk specimens with constant diameters, In the experimental work, the equal crack length, 2  In all of specimens with crack lengths The crack propagation process in rock and rock-like samples has also been studied by several researches using the central Straight through Crack Brazilian Disk (CSCBD) problem In the present work, the crack propagation process of rock like specimens (CSCBD problem) has been numerically studied by using the higher order boundary element method (already shown in The crack propagation mechanism of brittle substances has been studied by comprehensive experimental and numerical studies in recent years. It is a complicated process, and further research may be devoted to investigate crack propagation, crack coalescence in the bridge area, and final breakage paths of the rocks and rock-like materials under compressive line loading. In this research, a detailed analysis of the fracturing process of the pre-cracked rock-like disk specimens has been accomplished both by experimental tests and numerical simulation. Effects of fracturing on the failure load of the pre-cracked rock-like materials have been discussed. It has been shown that the crack propagation mechanism due to crack coalescence in the bridge area occur mainly by propagation of wing cracks emanating from the tips of the pre-existing cracks. Secondary cracks may also be produced after the propagation of the wing cracks in the specimens under compressive line loadings but it is experimentally shown that the wing cracks are mainly responsible for crack coalescence and the final crack propagating paths. The same experimental specimens are modeled numerically by an indirect boundary element method, and the corresponding numerical results are in good agreement with the experimental results. The experimental and numerical models illustrate the production of the wing cracks and the cracks propagation paths produced by the coalescence of the two pre-existing cracks in the bridge area.