Controlled underwater explosions of various composite materials (i.e. discarded DVDs, end-of-life mobile phones, tungsten carbide scrap as well as concrete slabs) were carried out in order to indicate the potential of this novel technique in liberating valuable components for recycling. The great advantage of the underwater explosion is especially noticeable where excessive comminution needs to be avoided in order to increase the degree of liberation or reduce the size of hazardous or composite materials. The main finding of this work is that a controlled underwater explosion, a contactless method, ensured the liberation of valuable components from the mounting matrix by generating enough pressure in solids during the transfer of the pulse through the medium (i.e. water). In other words, high-pressure pulses induced the liberation of valuable components that have a boundary with less valuable matrix.Breakage is the first and most important step of a process series occurring in a plant, prior to sorting, recovering or upgrading different components from each other ( Broadly speaking, the degree of liberation of the valuable component “A” from a composite material “A–B” increases as particle size is reduced. The degree of liberation The grade The degree of liberation is therefore a measure of the valuable component “A” that is free or liberated from all other components, without regard to distribution of grade for that matter ( Several authors, including The two most important fundamental properties that describe the liberation are the size of the “resulting” particles and their materials composition, which are both manipulated by a size-reduction process ( Nowadays, most of the end-of-life or waste materials undergo random size-reduction, also known as comminution, on their way to final processing, use or destination. The main objective of comminution in the form of cutting, shredding, crushing or grinding is to liberate valuable components from other less valuable components. It has been reported that the specific energy consumption of comminution varies from a few kW A product exiting the conventional comminution process is generally not sufficiently liberated or is over-ground, indicating that this mechanical process is not an ideal liberation technology; rather, it is a technology of reducing the dimensions of the material, with liberation occurring more as a secondary outcome. Conventional comminution technologies are therefore sometime inefficient in promoting liberation of valuable components, and excessive size-reduction or over-grinding must be avoided in order to reduce the electricity consumption in particular ( In order to avoid an excessive size-reduction, the inter-granular breakage along the grain boundaries would be desirable, since it would allow keeping the natural grain size and minimizing the over-grinding. A major challenge remains, therefore, in the developing techniques which can effectively use the input energy to promote liberation by boundary fracture of the valuable components, preventing unnecessary size-reduction of the feed ( Broadly speaking, conventional comminution techniques, which are usually used for liberation, are not suitable for processing hard (Mohs hardness >9; such as tungsten carbide) or hazardous (such as spent lithium-ion batteries) materials. Several unconventional comminution methods such as: high-pressure waterjets ( A so-called “explosive process” was first introduced in the mid-sixties by The technological benefit of the controlled underwater explosion is that it can explode or disintegrate complex composite materials without the introduction of the explosive inside the sample ( It is well known that explosion is a chemical reaction that converts an explosive material into a gas at very high pressure, generally in the order of 50,000 It is worth noting that the underwater explosion generates bubbles containing hot gaseous products of the explosion as well as a shock wave with high velocity and pressure propagating radially outwards. These in turn have a damaging effect on the adjacent solid structure or composite material ( There are reports ( Knowing that there is a minimum quantity of explosive, required for making a hole in the plate of specified thickness, Eq. For instance, 1 In order to ensure a good noise reduction, as well as to promote penetration of the high-pressure pulses into solid composites, the controlled explosion process took place in a liquid medium, i.e. water. In this work, discarded DVDs, end-of-life mobile phones, tungsten carbide scrap as well as concrete slabs reinforced with iron bars have been tested in order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the controlled underwater explosion in liberating hazardous or composite waste materials. A DVD (also known as “Digital Versatile Disc”) is an optical disc storage media format that is generally used for data storage, including movies with high video and sound quality. The metal reflective layer of a standard R-DVD is made of silver (Ag), and has a thickness of 70–90  End-of-life mobile phones, which were manufactured in Japan in 1996, were also fragmented or disintegrated by using the controlled underwater explosion. The weight of each unit, excluding the battery pack, was 87.8 In this set of experiments, 10 In this series of experiments, the concrete slabs, reinforced with an iron bar of 15 During the experiments, the explosive is immersed in a vessel filled with water, and placed near the sample to be fragmented. Both the sample and the explosive are suspended using wires. A 10 mesh screen (nominal screen opening: 20 The procedure for evaluating the degree of liberation consisted of hand-sorting the “liberated” particles or pieces after the controlled underwater explosion, and then measuring its mass (in kg). The main advantages of this method are that it is relatively cost effective, rapid, and the evaluation is straightforward. In this work, the liberation of several types of complex materials has been carried out by using a controlled underwater explosion. The aim was to point out the potential of this technique. In this experiment, the underwater explosion was applied to the discarded DVDs. As shown in In addition, it is worth noting that the controlled underwater explosion of end-of-life mobile phones might be a feasible alternative (when compared with other conventional comminution techniques), not only because of its effectiveness in terms of the energy applied, but also because a possible explosion due to the presence of the flammable electrolyte in the lithium-ion batteries can be avoided as well as the emission of HF gas can be contained. The following chemical reaction illustrates how HF gas is formed when electrolyte of batteries, which is usually made of lithium-hexafluorophosphate LiPF In addition, the following reaction indicates how HF can be contained. In other words, if the water used for the explosion contains calcium ions, fluorine ion would then precipitate as CaF It should be noted that water used for the controlled explosion could be re-used several times, before the dissolved Li can be absorbed by using MnO Generally speaking, tungsten carbide scraps is roasted in air atmosphere before crushing by means of a ball mill, and sieving to adjust particle size in order to increase the effectiveness of chemical leaching, using aqueous sodium hydroxide solution ( The results of the particle size distribution after the size reduction process are shown in  Considering the results of the size distribution analysis ( Different explosives, at various power factors and mounted at various stand-off distances, release and apply different amount of energy. In turn, different explosives differ in their efficiency to liberate a valuable component from a composite material. damage to the crusher, when processing hard materials (e.g. tungsten carbide or concrete slabs), can be avoided; composite materials or obsolete devices with various components of different densities (e.g. DVDs, mobile phones, etc.) can be better liberated, when compared with conventional crushing, without excessive crushing or over-grinding; hazardous materials (e.g. lithium ion batteries) can be easily contained as well as the exposure to dust can be drastically reduced; data erasure from the end-of-life electronic equipment can be ensured. In the longer term, this method could become the future of liberation technology, since legislation and environmental concern would increase the availability of secondary raw materials, being the mineral ores of the future. The underwater explosion was employed to liberate valuable components from various composite materials, which otherwise are difficult to process by the conventional mechanical comminution. Flexibility of adjustments to the parameters affecting the underwater explosion, i.e. the amount of explosive and the stand-off distance, give this technique a great advantage over mechanical comminution for the liberation various composite materials. The experimental results suggested that the shock waves generated by explosion are very effective in liberating the materials of different densities. The almost contactless mode of transferring pressure pulses from the explosion ensured well liberation of the valuable components without excessive size reduction. The authors believe that the commercial use of the controlled underwater explosion has a good chance of being a major development in liberation of various hazardous or composite materials. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 