Bioleaching processes in combination with electromagnetic separation can substantially improve the quality of feldspar raw materials. Bacterial destruction of silicates is necessary for releasing intergranular spaces of silicate grains. These are often impregnated with iron minerals which can be subsequently removed by electromagnetic separation. Bioleaching is also effective for the removal of surface layers of fine iron minerals. After the bioleaching, a new mineral, weddellite (calcium oxalate dihydrate), was identified in the fine grain fraction in samples. Weddellite is formed upon the destruction of Ca-plagioclase and its formation indicates that oxalic acid was one of the metabolites involved in the bioleaching process. Bioleaching resulted in a 35–41% decrease in Fe content of raw material from Strážov and the subsequent electromagnetic separation decreased the Fe content up to 69–74% of Fe. The second raw material was granite from Poproč and bioleaching removed 60% of Fe in spite of a high content of Fe2O3. The removal was increased up to 75% of Fe in combination with electromagnetic separation. Iron removal by biological leaching and electromagnetic separation ensures high quality and white color of raw material.Feldspar rocks are largely used as raw materials in the ceramic and the glass industry. They are, however, often associated with Fe and Ti impurities that decrease their economic value and hinder their application. A froth flotation process is used for most feldspar ore beneficiation. Iron-bearing minerals can be floated away either using sulfonate or fatty acid type collectors in acid circuit ( Other chemical methods involve the leaching with mineral acids, and treatment with reducers such as sodium dithionite plus aluminium sulfate or sulphur dioxide plus aluminium powder. The bleaching methods are usually suitable for achieving a higher extent of iron removal but they are more expensive, have complex operating conditions, and are environmentally hazardous ( Microorganisms can affect the mobility and accumulation of iron. Both oxidative and reductive reactions of iron by microorganisms play important roles in the iron cycle. Iron can even serve as an electron donor and energy source for some bacteria ( Experimental studies of the effect of microorganisms on mineral weathering rates and reactions are commonly performed in closed (batch) and open (flow-through) reaction vessels. In batch experiments, minerals and solutions are placed in a container, solution composition is monitored over time, and reaction rates are calculated from the evolution of solution chemistry. In flow-through experiments, solution passes through reaction vessels containing mineral samples and reaction rates are calculated from the effluent concentration and flow rate. Mineral weathering rates determined in vitro typically exceed those derived from field-based measurements by one to three orders of magnitude because controlled laboratory experiments cannot simulate complicated water–rock interactions in nature ( Recovery or removal of iron from non-metallic raw materials using heterotrophic microorganisms is a poorly studied area of biotechnology. Iron extraction with oxalic acid produced by fungi has been reported in several papers. This is a two-step process: metabolite production and leaching by the metabolite. Thus fungi were first cultured under conditions optimized for metabolite production and then the spent medium was used as leaching agent. High concentrations of oxalic acid can be produced by some fungi and a kaolin whiteness index of 80% has been obtained following the leaching ( The present study is concerned with the bioleaching-accelerated weathering of iron-contaminated feldspars. The aim of the study was to investigate the feasibility of using Iron solubilization by The bioleaching was carried out in conical flasks, each containing 50 All column-leaching test were conducted using 44 Dissolved Fe Solid residues were analyzed by X-ray diffraction using a Philips X’Pert SW-binary diffractometer with CuKα radiation (40 Dry electromagnetic separation was carried out using a laboratory high gradient magnetic separator with the induction of magnetic field at 1.3 Experimental studies of the effect of microorganisms on iron removal were performed in either closed (batch) or open (percolated columns) reaction vessels. When the bacteria of A discontinuous efflux of aqueous Fe from the batch vessels (Mat1B) and percolated columns (Mat1P) occurred during the 3-month incubation period ( The time course curve of Fe dissolution from Mat2B ( In the percolators, there was more Si dissolved from Mat2P ( In the Mat3B sample, the dissolution of Fe ( Concerning individual cumulative iron increasing, it is necessary to perform more detailed research to determine the factors which inhibited dissolution of iron between individual changes of medium in batch experiments. From the figures the cumulative increase of Fe dissolution over long periods of time can be seen, which could possibly be shortened by either more frequent exchange of medium, or higher addition of organic source for bacteria, and/or control of pH. The role of other parameters in reduction and dissolution of Fe and on microbial growth is unknown but warrants further investigation. The improvement of the quality of feldspar materials after biological, chemical and electromagnetic treatment can be assessed on the basis of quantitative chemical analyses of solid phases. Bioleaching of Fe was more effective in conical flasks in sample Mat1B and Mat3B. The extent of the dissolution is dependent on geological transformation processes, on the mineralogical composition of the feldspar samples and its association with Fe. The following is a brief description of the mineral samples used in this study. The Strážovské vrchy–Liešt’any-leucocratic granitoid sample (Mat1) is typically dominated by Ca, Na-plagioclases (albite) over K-feldspars. The sample contained quartz, dominant over plagioclases and K-feldspars, and an Fe-containing mica phase was also present which could be separated by electromagnetic separation. After the bioleaching of the Mat1B sample in conical flasks, Fe After the bioleaching, a new mineral, weddellite (calcium oxalate dihydrate), was identified in the fine grain fraction in samples Mat1 and Mat1B–BL ( The bioleaching of sample Ma1P in percolators was not so effective as in flasks. The decrease in the Fe The Čierny Balog–Vydrovo-hydrolyte granite Mat2 contained predominantly Ca, Na-plagioclase—albite over K-feldspars and also a high fraction of mica. The sample did not contain electromagnetic minerals. After the most effective bioleaching, the Fe-content decreased by 22%. Chemical leaching had a negligible effect (3%) on the dissolution of Fe. A low decrease in the Fe-content of sample Mat2 is due by geological transformation of granite which was exhibited by stark hydrothermal transformation—illinization up to kaolinization. The bioleaching (Mat2P) in percolators was less effective than in flasks and the decrease in the Fe-content was about 16%. Subsequent chemical leaching resulted in a similar decrease up to 20% in the Fe-content as in flasks. After bioleaching, a fine-grained fraction was again found to contain Ca-calcium oxalate dihydrate oxalic (weddellite) in smaller amounts. The Rudník–Poproč–granite Mat3 sample was the most suitable feldspar material in this work. The sample contained plagioclases and quartz as the main mineral phases and minor amounts of smectite and micas. Fe- and Mn-oxides were also found as confirmed by EDX analysis (data not shown). Despite the fact that Fe The residue product from magnetic separation of the Mat3 sample had a 6.9% lower mass, and it consisted of mainly layered material—X-ray analysis identified mica—besides quartz and feldspars (data not shown). The removal of micas results in decrease of MgO from 0.197% to 0.108% and decrease of K Chemical leaching of the bioleached sample Mat3B by 0.1 Biological leaching of sample Mat3P in columns had about half the reduction of Fe After biological leaching can we observe up to 28–38% decrease of content of CaO in samples Mat3B and Mat3P. Their rests form again new mineral phases weddellite in fine-grained fraction. We can identify in X-ray pattern at comparison of samples of fraction below 2 The overall effect of batch bioleaching on Fe removal was different in individual samples (Mat1—35%, Mat2—22% and Mat3—60%). The use of heterotrophic microorganisms in metal extraction from non-sulphidic ores has not received much attention for several reasons. The neutral pH range at which these microorganisms grow allows for microbial contamination of leach systems, a problem difficult to control and correct. In principle, sterilization is costly and technically not feasible for large-scale operations ( In this study, feldspar raw materials were refined with contact with Fe-reducing The availability of carbon source and its concentration in the medium is found to be crucial for the growth of the heterotrophic organisms and metabolite production ( Molasses can be used as a relatively inexpensive organic carbon source for the heterotrophs, leading to the formation of metabolites, most notably organic acids acting as leaching agents. Bioleaching is considerably slower than conventional techniques of removing iron impurities, and this needs additional optimization and possibly even input of other forms of organic carbon. The simplest laboratory bioleaching experiment for iron removal with heterotrophic bacteria on natural raw materials were conducted to explore a simple cyclic operation for potential use at the industrial scale. Heterotrophic bacteria growing in the presence feldspar raw materials are able to dissolve iron. Quickly forming anaerobic conditions by bacteria enable simple manipulation with the sample solution. The bioleaching process involved acid attack, resulting in the solubilization of Si from the silicate phases and release impregnated particles of iron minerals from silicate matrix. By this way it was possible to recover low weight of the residue product from magnetic separation. The amount of solubilized and removed iron is not directly proportional to the initial Fe content of natural sample because it is dependent to geochemical transformation processes of rocks, mineralogical composition of iron minerals and dissemination of iron minerals in silicate matrix. The bioleaching of non-metallics by heterotrophic bacteria may be of commercial interest to ceramic and glass industries, but further work is needed to elucidate and optimize these bioprocesses. This work was supported by Science and Technology Assistance Agency under the Contract No. APVT-51-006304 and by Slovak Academy of Science No. SO 2/9011/22 and No. VEGA 2/5033/5.