In this research we focus on the differences caused by the experimental conditions in bubble rise tests at the initial phases of motion in Dowfroth 200, Nasfroth 240 and Dowfroth 250 solutions. Two bubble release techniques were used and the first 50ms of the rise were recorded with high-speed camera.
                  The results suggest that the method of bubble release strongly influences the behaviour of bubbles. The extent of surface deformation caused by different bubble release techniques effect on form drag and therefore the bubble rise velocity due to the different surface stabilization capabilities of frothers.One of the key parameters effecting flotation is the bubble motion, which is determined among others by the size of the bubbles, viscosity of the liquid and the properties of the gas/liquid interface. It is well known that the bubble surface in an ultra pure system is mobile and hence the terminal rising velocity is higher than that of a solid sphere of identical diameter and density ( In a bubble moving at creeping flow velocities in quiescent liquid, the adsorbed surfactants move towards the rear stagnant point ( The work of   Creating and releasing bubbles from a capillary has been the method of choice. The method allows releasing constant size bubbles with controlled Eotvos numbers ( By separating the creation and the release of the bubbles we assume to be able to have the starting point of adsorption better defined and get rid of the surface wave. Our hypothesis is that the release method has a marked effect on the bubble behaviour during the first 50 The tests were carried out using polyglycol ether type frothers (namely, Dowfroth 200 (DF200), Dowfroth 250 (DF250) and Nasfroth 240 (NF240)). The molecular structures, weight and critical coalescence concentration (CCC) values of the frothers are shown in The equilibrium surface tension of the liquids was determined using the pendant drop technique. A Cam200 contact angle and surface tension measuring instrument (KSV Instrument Ltd.) was used to obtain the equilibrium surface tension versus concentration isotherms. The dynamic surface tension of the solutions was measured using the maximum bubble pressure method. For these measurements a bubble pressure analyser (BPA-800P) (KSV Instrument Ltd.) was used. Two bubble rising velocity columns were designed for the measurements ( The formation and rising of bubbles were monitored with a Photron Fastcam SA-1 high-speed camera with 640 In the second bubble rise column the bubble creation and bubble rising occurred in two different liquids. For this purpose a Split Bubble Rising Column (SBRC) was designed ( A funnel installed in the ceiling of the lower partition directed the bubbles into a downward-open rotating valve. When the valve was turned into the upward position, the bubble was released into the upper partition of the column through a transmitter orifice. Bubble motion was monitored and recorded with the Photron Fastcam SA-1 not just over 50 The recorded images were analysed with Matrox Inspector image analysis software. The rising velocity (cm/s) and aspect ratio ( Three sets of experiments were performed based on the procedure already described ( Thus even though the dynamic surface tension isotherms measured in 100  Bubbles, in presence of DF200, reached a rather similar maximum rising velocity in both columns even though their aspect ratio shows a significant difference. In the BRVC the bubble rising velocity curves at the different frother solutions are running together while in SBRC the rising velocity in the NF240 and DF250 solutions decreased significantly just as the bubble surface oscillation ( When the concentration was increased above the CCC (25 In the SBRC, the bubble rising velocity in 25   In the SBRC the observation of bubbles in the early-stages suggest that bubble rising velocity and aspect ratio is not affected by increasing frother concentrations above the CCC in the presence of DF frothers. In order to determine that this observation is valid on a longer timescale further measurement were performed to investigate the bubble behaviour in the SBRC at later stages of rising. Bubbles were monitored to a height of 50 Even though the early-stage bubble rising in DF200 showed no apparent difference in bubble rising velocity and aspect ratio with increasing concentration above the CCC point in the later stage of rising the results suggest a small deviation between the 25  In the presence of NF240 the increasing frother concentration do not show remarkable difference on the aspect ratio even though the rising velocity of the bubbles is significantly higher in 8 In presence of DF250 neither the rising velocity nor the aspect ratio shows remarkable differences with increasing frother concentration ( In ultra pure water the same bubble rising velocity was observed at the 50th The difference in rising velocity means that the form drag decreases in presence of bubble surface oscillation. As the property of the medium is identical in both of the columns than presumably the skin friction is the same as well. Therefore the results suggest that the difference in rising velocity originates from the change in the form drag. This change occurs due to the variable bubble shape during rising caused by surface oscillation. In the SBRC the bubbles reach a constant or only slightly variable shape immediately after leaving the transmitter orifice thus the form drag could be considered as an almost constant or slightly variable value. However in the BRVC fast surface oscillations occur, therefore the form drag varies over a long time scale until the bubble reach a constant shape. The magnitude of the bubble surface oscillation is dependent upon frother type and concentration. This could be the effect of the different adsorption/desorption times or elasticity properties caused by the presence of frothers molecules. In the presence of DF200 the results measured in the BRVC suggest that increasing surface tension does not effect the surface rigidity until the concentration are extremely high (7000 Above the CCC point the deviation in the rising velocity is recognisable already at the early-stage. The results observed in SBRC suggest that the rising velocity of the bubble does not decrease with increasing concentration above the CCC point. However in the BRVC in presence of the bubble surface oscillation caused by the capillary detachment the DF200 could decrease the rising velocity of the bubble only at extremely high concentration (7000 In the presence of NF240 the results observed in the SBRC suggest that the bubble becomes rigid at 25 In the BRVC the surfaces become rigid only in the presence of 500 The effect of DF250 is seen at low concentrations in both of the columns. As expected, in the SBRC the effect is evident due to the absence of the bubble surface oscillations. The results suggest fast surface stabilization, which leads to a lower terminal velocity. The results suggest that the “stagnant cap” model widely used in describing bubble behaviour in surfactant solutions is not adequate because it does not account for the transient phenomena observed on the bubble surface when oscillatory motion taken place. As several authors have mentioned, bubbles become less oscillatory, almost rigid, in the presence of high frother concentration ( The study has also shown that the method of bubble release has a major effect on the bubble rising velocity. Under steady state conditions, when there is no bubble surface oscillations increasing frother concentration does not affect the rising velocity above the CCC. On the other hand, when bubble surface oscillation occurs is present, the different frothers have different stabilizing ability. This ability does not only depend on the adsorption/desorption rate of the frother, but also on the air/liquid interface elasticity. The findings of this research have highlighted that the models describing bubble behaviour in surfactants solutions lack a major building block that accounts for the dynamic effects caused by frother molecule migration at the air/liquid interface causing local variations in the properties of the bubble surface. These local variations could have far reaching effects on the bubble coalescence and breakup as well as on the particle-bubble attachment and detachment process. The authors would like to thank Iita Kejonen for the image analysis process at Aalto University and Nasaco International LLC for providing the frothers. Special thank to Mr. Wei Zhang from McGill University for the CCC measurements.