Following on from the very successful The conference was opened on the Wednesday morning by Dr. Wolfgang Baum who is currently the Director of Ore Characterization of FLSmidth, USA in Salt Lake City/Utah. His keynote “Ore characterization, process mineralogy and lab automation – a roadmap for future mining” discussed the role of ore characterization and process mineralogy in tackling future mining and mineral processing: deeper and harder ores, lower grade ores, more underground mining, higher throughput, subsea mining, bigger and faster equipment. Down hole probes, cross belt neutron analyzers, over-the-belt NIR, on-line XRD and automated mineralogy modules are expected to be common place in the near future. The second keynote presentation was presented by Prof Jan Miller who is the Ivor Thomas Distinguished Professor of Metallurgical Engineering for the College of Mines and Earth Sciences at the University of Utah. His keynote: “The continued development of X-ray CT as an effective tool in process mineralogy” discussed the use of X-ray micro- and nano-CT for quantitative mineral exposure/liberation analysis of multiphase populations in 3D. Since his early work on tomography with Dr. Lin in the 1980s where they built their first X-ray CT, modern devices now offer the non-destructive analysis of up to 30,000 particles (100 (Prof. Miller and his colleague Dr. Wang were in a serious car accident in Tibet in July that involved transportation via air ambulance back to Beijing, and then Salt Lake City. We wish Prof Miller well for his recovery and rehabilitation in Salt Lake City). The various conference presentations discussed the application of process mineralogy throughout the unit processes of the metallurgical flow sheet (comminution, flotation, hydrometallurgy, pyrometallurgy), covering both the well-known commodities (PGM, Au, U, Cu–Ni, REE, Fe-ore and coal), as well as some more diverse applications (e.g. the process mineralogy of waste, and the use of process mineralogy in optimising the whiteness in paper production). In addition, there was a strong focus on both mineralogy measurements (automated mineralogy, innovative image analysis, XRD, tomography), and the representation and interpretation of the data (representing and interpreting the liberation spectrum, estimating the error in measurements of mineral grain size distribution, comparison of 2D and 3D particle and grain size measurements). All in all, there was constructive and positive discussion during the course of this interesting, well rounded and forward looking conference. Selected papers from I look forward to welcoming back old friends and new many faces to