Objective
                  To present a case of a traumatic fracture of a polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) patient-specific implant (PSI) for cranioplasty.
               
                  Methods
                  A 14-year-old boy with a history of right decompressive hemicraniectomy and reconstructive cranioplasty with a PMMA PSI presented after an unhelmeted bicycle accident with somnolence, confusion, seizures, left hemiparesis, and an obviously deformed cranium.
               
                  Results
                  Computed tomography scan showed a comminuted, depressed fracture of the implant and cerebral contusions. The implant was seen to be shattered, resulting in displaced, overriding fragments and significant damage to underlying brain. The patient remained neurologically stable. To minimize the number of operations, intervention was delayed while a polyetheretherketone PSI was fabricated. During surgery, it was noted that the fractured pieces of the implant had caused dural lacerations, and some pieces were embedded in brain parenchyma. The fractured PMMA was removed, and the new implant was placed. The patient remained hemiparetic and was later transferred to an inpatient rehabilitation facility.
               
                  Conclusions
                  PMMA PSIs are commonly used for large defects and generally have good outcomes with low rates of revision. The case report described involves a shattered PMMA PSI after a traumatic impact, which resulted in hemiparesis. The question arises if this type of complication can be easily avoided with the addition of titanium onlay to restrict displacement in the event of fracture. This onlay represents a minor change of technique that could prevent migration of fracture fragments.Various synthetic materials have been used for reconstructive cranioplasty with comparable results, including polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), titanium, hydroxyapatite, polyetheretherketone, and bioceramic. Preformed, patient-specific implants (PSIs) using these materials are available, a development that allows for a good cosmetic result and minimal operative time dedicated to reshaping of the implant. Traumatic fracturing of PSIs appears to be rare. Hydroxyapatite constructions have been noted to fracture at relatively low forces roughly equivalent to ground-level falls, but preformed constructs augmented with titanium mesh have been shown in biomechanical studies to be resistant at such forces A 14-year-old boy had a prior history of severe traumatic brain injury and right decompressive hemicraniectomy in 2006. The patient underwent reconstructive cranioplasty with a PMMA PSI (Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA) in a delayed fashion and recovered function to a great degree. He was admitted to a referring facility 5 years later after involvement in an unhelmeted bicycle accident. He was noted to be somnolent and confused with a laceration over his forehead and an obviously deformed cranium. He vomited several times and was intubated after a seizure. A computed tomography scan showed traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage underlying a comminuted, depressed fracture of his previous implant, with several fragments stacking one beneath the other ( On admission to our institution, the patient was intubated, followed commands, and had left hemiparesis. A repeat computed tomography scan showed interval development of a small cerebral contusion under the displaced fragments ( During surgery, the fractured pieces of the previous implant were noted to have traveled significant distances from their original sites, causing dural lacerations ( PMMA PSIs have become increasingly common as cranioplasty implants; this is likely in response to convenience of use, and the complication rates associated with other materials, including native bone. Resorption of primary autologous bone cranioplasty is common, especially in children and adolescents in cases with defects >75 cm We describe the case of a shattered PMMA implant after a traumatic impact. This appears to be a very rare occurrence; however, the implications of such an event can be significant. In this case, the patient at discharge remained with significant neurologic deficit believed to be due to fracture comminution and submarining at the time of impact. There has been 1 previous report of a similar traumatic fracture of a PSI, albeit of a different material Fractures of hydroxyapatite implants secondary to relatively minor trauma have been noted; the addition of titanium mesh as a scaffold tended to improve implant strength