As farm machinery has become heavier, concern has grown about its direct effects on soil physical conditions and its indirect effects on crop yields and soil biota. To study the relationships between these parameters, non-grazed temporary grassland plots on a loamy sand soil were subjected to full-width load traffic with widely different loads (0, 4.5, 8.5 and 14.5t) one to four times per year for a period of 5 years. Soil bulk density was monitored as an indicator of soil compaction. Grass yield was measured throughout the experimental period. Root distribution over the soil profile and nematodes populations were assessed during the final year of the experiment. Results indicate that a moderate degree of compaction (∼4.5t load) gave the highest crop yield and that at higher degrees of compaction roots failed to penetrate into the deeper soil layers (>20cm depth). Total numbers of nematodes were not affected by compaction, but their distribution over the various feeding types shifted towards a population with increased numbers of herbivores and decreased numbers of bacterivores and omnivores/predators. This change in the structure of the nematode assemblage is associated with poorer conditions for crop growth.Soil compaction is an important form of physical soil degradation ( Nematodes are involved in a wide range of activities and connections to other organisms in the soil food web, comprising species feeding on living roots (herbivores (H)), on microorganisms (bacterivores (B); fungivores (F)), and species feeding on larger organisms (predators (P)) or on mixed diets (omnivores (O)). Nematode communities in permanent grasslands are relatively stable with respect to numbers and have a high species diversity. Numbers of specimens in trophic groups often decrease in the order B>F>H>O/P ( Trophic differences among nematode populations were observed to be indicative of variations in crop yields ( A field experiment was carried out to study the relationships between traffic load and physical, biological and (crop) production characteristics of the soil. In 1988 the experiment ( The research was carried out at the Oostwaardhoeve experimental farm (longitude 52°18′N, latitude 4°85′E) in the Wieringermeer, a reclaimed polder, used for agricultural production since 1934. The soil is a calcareous loamy (30% silt) marine sand (M50: 50–105), containing 5% organic matter ( In April 1988 an area of ca. 2 The experiment was extended with different rates of nitrogen fertilization (0, 140, 280 and 420 Over the period 1988–1992, soil porosity, permeability and penetrability were reduced. To characterize the soil condition, measurements were carried out at different depths, after each harvest: thickness of the initially loosened layer, soil bulk density, penetration resistance, and the soil moisture content (measured weekly). To measure the thickness of the loosened layer, in each plot five tiles (30 Soil bulk density was measured in the 15–20 and 30–35 The penetration resistance was measured with a Bush Penetrometer conus type B, ASAE Standards, 1993. This parameter, expressed as average values of 10 penetrations per event in the soil layers 0–5, 5–10, 10–15 Soil moisture contents (w/w) in different soil layers, including the 0–5 Grass yield and distribution of grass roots over the soil profile were measured. Crop responses are likely to be directly related to properties such as pore size distribution, permeability, aeration, etc. and indirectly to bulk density and compaction. Grass dry matter yield was determined after each harvest of 20 The distribution of the roots over the soil profile was measured once by the pin-board method ( Nematodes were isolated from the soil in 1992, the fifth year of the experiment, in March, June, September, and December, in the 4.5 and 14.5 Effects of compaction were tested by analysis of variance (ANOVA): all pairwise multiple comparison procedures were carried out according to the Student–Newman–Keuls method. The thickness of the initially loosened layer of 60 Soil bulk density, not measured in the sod but in the 15–20 and 30–35 The resistance to penetration in the various soil layers varied between seasons along with soil moisture, with the highest values in summer (dry) and the lowest in winter (wet conditions). The resistance increased in all load treatments from 1988 to 1989 and then stabilized ( Soil moisture content in the 0–5 Above ground dry matter yields as affected by N-application and load-treatment are presented in In all years, grass yield was highest in the 4.5 The distribution of roots over the soil profile differed significantly between the 4.5 and 14.5 After 4 years of grass growth, total numbers of nematodes in the slightly (4.5 With respect to the taxa, herbivorous Passage of load traffic decreased the thickness of the loosened soil layer considerably and already after the first year of the experiment the soil had stabilized into a physical condition where loading and bearing capacity were in equilibrium. Thickness of the loosened layer, bulk density and penetration resistance clearly depended on the load traffic. In all years the 4.5 The number of nematodes 120 It is evident that a certain degree of soil compaction is necessary to obtain optimum crop development and yield. If the soil is too loose (0 The authors thank J. Bloem, P.C. de Ruiter and H.G. van Faassen for their help with the manuscript, G. Brouwer for the measurements of root distribution.