Objective
                  This study aimed to identify the optimal micro- and submicroscale topographies of titanium (Ti) substrata that would most significantly influence adhesion, proliferation, and other activities of these cells.
               
                  Design
                  Truncated V-shaped microgrooves in 60μm-wide and 10μm-deep cross-sections with 0°, 30°, 60°, or 90° angles between the microgrooves and ridge-top submicroscale texture were created on the Ti substrata (designated NE60/10-0°, NE60/10-30°, NE60/10-60° and NE60/10-90°, respectively). Ground titanium with submicroscale texture but with no microgrooves was used as the control substratum, NE0. Scanning electron microscopic observation and the assays determining the cell adhesion, cell proliferation and osteoblast differentiation were performed.
               
                  Results
                  Cells more actively migrated into the microgrooves on NE60/10-30° than into the microgrooves on any other substrata tested, suggesting that the cells utilise the increased surface area of the substrata at the microscale level. NE60/10-0° and NE60/10-30° substrata generally enhanced adhesion, proliferation, alkaline phosphatase activity, and osteoblast differentiation of human primary cells when compared to other Ti substrata, and significant correlations were observed between these cellular activities.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Here, we show that the contact guidance of human primary cells grown on Ti substrata can be controlled more by specific submicroscale textures on ridge tops than by the dimensions of surface microgrooves only. Also, the degree of angles created between the submicroscale textures and microgrooves on Ti substrata significantly affect cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation in human primary cells.The collective topographies of growth substrata can have a synergistic effect on osteogenic signalling and osteoblast differentiation in human primary cells by enhancing cell proliferation and differentiation at the micro- and submicroscale levels, respectively. A groove depth of 35 We hypothesized that a specific combination of submicroscale texture and microgroove characteristics of Ti substrata, as well the direction of the texture in relation to that of the microgrooves, would enhance various responses of human primary cells. This study aimed to identify the optimal micro- and submicroscale topographies of Ti substrata that would most significantly influence adhesion, proliferation, and other activities of these cells. Grade-2 commercially pure titanium (Ti) sheets of 0.2-mm thickness (TSM-TECH Co. Ltd., Ulsan, Korea) were buffered with emery powder compounds using a cloth wheel (Yougar Enterprise Inc., Incheon, Korea) at 1800 rotations per minute on an angle grinder (GWS 20-230; Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart, Germany) to create submicroscale texture with a uniform direction and pitch of approximately 100–300 All patients providing tissue used in this study were enrolled according to informed consent guidelines as prescribed in an approved Institutional Review Board protocol of Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Human gingival fibroblasts (HGFs) were obtained from healthy gingival tissues of patients undergoing oral surgery for the removal of impacted wisdom teeth at the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery of Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, and primary HGFs were cultured from the tissue as previously described. At 16 HGFs were seeded on the 96-well Ti substrata of NE0, NE60/10-0°, NE60/10-30°, NE60/10-60° and NE60/10-90° at a cell density of 3 HGFs were seeded on the 24-well Ti substrata of NE0, NE60/10-0°, NE60/10-30°, NE60/10-60° and NE60/10-90° at a cell density of 1 MSCs and PLCs were plated at a cell density 4 To determine the degree of osteoblast differentiation in MSCs and PLCs, levels of their extracellular calcium deposition were quantified as follows. MSCs and PLCs were plated at a cell density of 4 The assays to quantify BrdU cell adhesion, CCK cell proliferation, ALP activity, and extracellular Ca deposition were performed in parallel in quadruplicate, and the mean values and standard deviations were calculated. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the mean values between the assay data on various Ti substrata surface topographies. Pearson's correlation analysis was used to identify relationships between the results from all of the assays described above. SPSS 17.0 software was used for all statistical analyses. Using SEM, we observed that HGFs on NE60/10-0° were oriented along both microgrooves and submicroscale textures, whereas HGFs on NE60/10-30° and NE60/10-90° oriented along the direction of submicroscale textures only ( In support of our hypothesis, we observed that after 16 Analysis of the ALP activity in MSCs and PLCs after 7 and 14 days of osteogenic culture revealed that cells grown on NE60/10-0° showed highest and significantly higher levels of ALP activity when compared to cells cultured on NE0, NE60/10-60°, or NE60/10-90° substrata ( Although a considerable number of studies have investigated the relationship between osteoblast alignment and adhesion, very few studies regarding the effects of submicroscale grooves (or nanogrooves) on osteogenic activities have been performed. However, one study reported that 100 Twenty parameters ( Pearson's correlation analyses revealed significant relationships between all variables described above except between HGF CCK 72 This study demonstrates for the first time that submicroscale texture on Ti substrata exceeds the combined surface topographies of microscale grooves in its ability to induce contact guidance in human primary cells. We observed that certain submicroscale textures led to enhanced cell migration into the microgrooves, thus enabling HGFs to utilise the increased surface area at the microscale level and ultimately inducing cell adhesion and proliferation. However, NE60/10-60° and NE60/10-90° poorly induced cell adhesion and proliferation of HGFs, which is suggested to be related to the controversies shown in cell shape and contact guidance ( We noticed a subtle difference in the overall patterns between the enhancement of osteogenic activity and promoted cell proliferation in this study. Although we observed non-significant differences between the effects of NE60/10-0° and NE60/10-30° substrata on cellular activities measured in this study, NE60/10-30° induced highest levels of cell adhesion and proliferation ( The authors would like to thank Prof. Yoon Goo Kang at the School of Dentistry at Kyung Hee University for obtaining periodontal ligament tissues.    Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 