This paper presents a numerical investigation of solid separation in jigging device. Jigging is a gravity separation method commonly used by the minerals industry to separate coal, iron ore, diamonds and other minerals on the basis of particle size and/or density. Separation is recognised as being heavily dependent on fluid motion in the jig. This study explores the effects of the inlet time dependent velocity profile in relation to a wide criterion on jigging performance. Modelling of the liquid–solid system is performed through a combination of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) to simulate liquid flow and discrete element method (DEM) to resolve particle motion. The initial packing conditions consist of a binary-density particle system of 1130 particles each 1cm in diameter. A range of jigging profiles have been implemented in mineral processing. In this study the sinusoidal pulsation profile is selected adopting variations in both amplitude and frequency. The performance of profile variants are compared in terms of solid flow patterns, separation kinetics, energy, and mean particle position. These quantitative comparisons demonstrate significant differences in the segregation rate, energy, and solid phenomena, helping find an alternative optimum operating setting for the system. In addition, boundaries of operation are found in terms of frequency and amplitude limits and the concentration mechanics are investigated in these regions.Jigging is a gravity separation process adopted by the minerals industry to separate ore minerals on the basis of particle size and/or density Much of the published research performed in jigging has been experimental Modern investigations of jigging phenomena using numerical simulation techniques has shown to be a fast growing area. Solnordal et al. Only a few jigging studies have adopted the DEM–CFD approach Previous studies using the DEM–CFD model have used a sinusoidal pulsation profile with the exception of Dong et al. The DEM–CFD model has been well documented in the literature. For brevity, only the outline of the model structure is described below. The solid phase is treated as a discrete phase and solved using DEM. The translational and rotational motions of a particle at any time, The particle–particle and particle–wall contact force is based on the soft-sphere method. The particle fluid interaction force is calculated using the Di Felice drag force correlation The particle flow is solved numerically using an in-house DEM code The model consists of a rectangular domain filled with a binary-density spherical particle system and liquid. The particles were divided into 565 light particles and 565 heavy particles with respective densities of 2540 Uniform liquid flow was injected through the inlet and the flowrate varied with time according to the pulsation profile simulated. The inlet flow for the sinusoidal pulsation profile was established using a sinusoidal function. The pulsation profiles are compared by holding the shape of the profile constant and using three variations of period ( Solid flow patterns are plotted first to obtain a visual understanding of the stratification process. In the initial cycle the particle bed begins well mixed. As pulsion proceeds the bed starts to loosen from the bottom and total bed expansion follows via a loosening wave rapidly spreading upwards through the bed. The bed is left almost uniformly expanded (see The mean particle position can be used to quantify particle behaviours by illustrating the average height of both particle types separately. The maximum particle displacements of all variants in the first cycle can be visualised in Therefore two important criteria must be met for segregation: a profile must sufficiently lift the bed to a height where expansion and loosening can proceed, but also allow enough time for particles to rearrange. The coordination number represents the average sum of contacts of a particle type, with either similar or different particle types, e.g. the heavy particles average contact number with light particles. The heavy-light coordination number is a good indication of particle segregation and can be written as: Of the nine profiles, eight completely segregated the particle bed within 60 A consistently low coordination number indicates stable separation and a segregated bed. However, it does not characterise in which way particles have settled. Desirable settling occurs when particles are stratified vertically with one particle type directly on top of another, this ensures separate delivery to launders. In addition to segregation the settling also needs to be stable. If settling is inconsistent it is undesirable and unreliable in jig processing even if the bed is perfectly segregated. The solid flow patterns, as in The effects of volumetric water input and cycle period on the separation time is shown in The relationship between period, It can be concluded from the results that an optimal amplitude and frequency exists in terms of separation time. The number of jigging cycles used to achieve segregation can be important in terms of operating wear and fatigue. High cycle numbers may cause certain mechanical damages earlier. The two equal fastest profile variants of frequency, With exception of the high frequency variant of Using mean particle position data to identify at what point in the cycle the bed is at rest, this point is made the beginning of the following cycle. To illustrate how the profile setting can be improved the settings where changed for variant of There are various parameters to judge the performance of a jigging device. In addition to the separation speed, number of cycles to achieve segregation, and the final degree of separation as already discussed, the energy input is an important concern in industrial processes. The following formula is used to calculate the input power, where power is a product of total pressure drop Δ The results show energy per cycle is proportional to water volumetric input. Further, the energy required is shown not to be dependent on the time taken to achieve segregation. A profile can use little or large amount of energy and segregate either quickly or slowly. Each profile has individual characteristics and reasons which describe the energy required to achieve segregation. There is no correlation between the profiles which can be used as a quick aid for power evaluation. For example, neither: litres input, segregation speed, pulsion or suction velocities or duration, alone correlate to energy. It is a combination of all these variables which decide the energy outcome. Further, in six of the nine profiles considerable power is found to be used in suction. This occurs in situations when the bed falls into a packed or partially-packed bed while a high suction velocity and pressure drop is present. Optimising the profile as shown previously by immediately beginning the following pulsion cycle once the bed comes to rest can reduce or remove this redundant power usage. This reduction depends on how high the suction velocity and low the average porosity is in the remainder of the jigging cycle. Another method is to use hutch water addition. This involves introducing water from the bottom of the column with a positive upwards velocity nullifying the high negative suction velocity. Hutch water addition is not a new concept in relation to controlling the dilation of the bed however no references have been made to controlling energy usage. A DEM–CFD model was used to investigate the particle separation process in a jigging device using a sinusoidal profile. The study selected three variations in amplitude and applied those over three frequencies. Only one variant did not induce particle separation, those that displayed separation did so at different rates and energy usage. Of the nine variants eight were shown to completely separate the particles within 60 Broadening the study to more variations in amplitude and frequency it was found an optimal amplitude and frequency exists in terms of separation time. Increasing the amplitude will decrease the separation time up to a point where the bed ceases to settle before the proceeding cycle. At this point the bed undergoes pulsion in an unsettled state which slows separation. Alternatively, increasing frequency has a similar effect of increasing amplitude. Separation time reduces until the bed can no longer settle before the beginning of pulsion in the proceeding cycle resulting in slower separation. The number of cycles used to complete separation is found to be vastly different and could be a consideration in operation. For example, two profiles where found to separate in an equal time of 10 The mean particle position indicates the particle bed remains at rest for some time during suction which varies depending on variant. This static moment is a waste of processing time, by eliminating this period the separation time is found to reduce significantly. Two variants investigated separated 15% faster. Total energy required to complete separation is shown not to be dependent on the time taken to achieve segregation. It is a combination of many factors which contribute to the final energy outcome e.g. water velocity, pulsion duration, and separation time. Further, in six of the nine profiles considerable power is found to be used in suction. This arises from the fluid being forced at high velocity through an already packed or partially-packed bed. This redundant power usage can be reduced or removed by immediately beginning the following pulsion cycle once the bed comes to rest. Another possible method is to use hutch water addition to eliminate the high negative suction velocity. Finally, this numerical study has proven helpful in the examination of jigging, however, a future experiment will help quantify the accuracy of results. This work was supported by a CSIRO OCE PhD scholarship.