We propose to discuss the importance of unified 6D description for understanding the geometrical aspects of interfaces in quasicrystalline and its related phases. These will in particular be presented in relation to the icosahedrally related phases. However, the viewpoints adopted will be sufficiently general to help discuss interfaces in any quasiperiodic systems. The consequence of 6D homophase/heterophase interfaces on 3D physical space will be considered by taking examples. These include RAs/IQC, IQC/DQC interfaces apart from the hypertwin and antiphase domain boundaries. It will be shown that such a description does not promise to solve the problems of energetics of interfaces in these systems. It will be concluded that 3D and hypercrystal structural description need to supplement each other for unravelling the underlying mechanism of growth of a particular interface during processing of these materials. The importance of HREM studies in understanding the interface structures in aperiodic systems will be clearly brought out.Grain and twin boundaries in a single phase materials are 2D homophase interfaces whereas boundaries between two phases give rise to 2D heterophase interfaces. All these interfaces are regions of high energy and are in a metastable state vis-a-vis that of interior of the grains. However, there are special boundaries whose presence in the bulk solids is relatively favourable. Examples of these are twin boundaries and interfaces with a high density of coincidence site lattices. Apart from the coherent twin boundary (where the two grains are mirror related), a polycrystalline material may have low angle and high angle boundaries. The former compensates the mismatch at the interface through the introduction of dislocations at regular intervals whereas the latter displays structural units at the boundary having no relationship with any of the two adjoining grains. Such homophase interfaces in general enjoy five degrees of freedom or require five parameters to be specified for specifying the orientation The heterophase interfaces are characterised by the nature of registry of the two grains and can belong to any of the following three categories: (a) coherent, (b) semicoherent, and (c) incoherent. We may draw certain analogies of these with those of homophase interfaces. The coherent boundary is akin to a twin boundary and appears if there is a change in chemistry without a change in the structure of the planar net forming the interface. The other two are similar to low angle and high angle grain boundaries, respectively Let us try to understand the nature of homophase boundaries in crystalline approximants and quasiperiodic 3D solids. The definition of grain boundaries or any special variants of these remains valid. However, the characterisation has obvious difficulties (or limitations) if we propose to invoke Bollmann We shall close the discussion on hypertwins here by stating that if the unit cell size is extended to that of the typical grains of any perfect quasicrystal, then the characterisation of the interfaces in such systems becomes further ill posed in 3D physical space. All subsequent discussion in this presentation shall now revolve around converting this to a well posed problem by utilising the 6D structural description of the various quasicrystalline and their related phases. We have dealt with certain aspects of crystallography of interfaces by indicating the problems and prospects of such studies earlier Any 3D quasicrystals having rank equal to 6 can be better described through a 6D mathematical construct. This essentially requires identification of a lattice compatible with the point group symmetry of 3D physical solid and also 3D motif(s) with appropriate chemistry/geometry which are mostly extended in pseudo-space. In a similar way, a 5D mathematical construct of a lattice and motif in conformity with the above criteria seems to be sufficient for generating 2D quasiperiodic structures for the pentagonal, octagonal, decagonal and dodecagonal quasicrystals. The 2D, 1D and 0D quasiperiodic structures accordingly have ranks equal to 5, 4 and 3, respectively. All the 1D incommensurate and RAS phases are examples of the latter two categories, respectively. The complexity of interface characterisation in the above quasiperiodic/incommensurate phases arises mainly due to the presence of aperiodicity in at least one of the participating phases. Most of the studies having coexistence of various phases, however, pertain to structures where the golden mean A grain boundary in a 6D phase will be a 5D hypersurface arising out of two differently oriented adjacent grains of the above phase. The total number of parameters needed to specify the geometry of the 5D interface will be 11 for any general boundary. Various attempts Now, we consider two adjoining 6D grains of The icosahedral and decagonal phases are formed in same alloy systems with slight change in their composition and experimental conditions. Menguy et al. The lattice parameters of 6D hypercubic crystal and that of 6D orthogonal cell are, respectively, We now proceed to quantify the consequence of the above during experimental observations. For the sake of continuity, we reproduce the basis vectors of SVI from Ref. The 3D physical direct component ( Since the The expression for Above analysis is applicable for a special type IQC/DQC interface for epitaxially grown materials. The nature of interface is going to be entirely different whenever the growth direction of the two phases is different. Such a condition is more prevalent under rapid solidification process of the alloys. The analysis will then differ in a qualitative way as the interface plane will result owing to registry of a quasiperiodic layer of IQC with the (quasiperiodic+periodic) layer of DQC. The details of characterisation can be accomplished by (i) determining the orientation relationships of the two phases by taking composite electron diffraction patterns and (ii) comparing the edge lengths of the appropriate tiles based on the expression of relevant physical direct space components. The 2D boundaries discussed in We shall now discuss the example of homophase interface in RAS. The hypertwins offer a clear-cut evidence of predominant role of motif in large unit cell structures. The orientation relationships between the two variants in Al–Mn–Fe–Si system have been shown to be dictated by the unit cell content. Do we have a similar situation for a quasilattice and its decoration? The geometry of the former is dictated by (i) choice of two or more units and (ii) matching rules to ensure quasiperiodicity and global noncrystallographic symmetry. Both of them need to conform to (i) radii of various atoms, (ii) valency, and (iii) nature of bonding. Can we really observe the effects of the two factors experimentally as encountered for hypertwins? Let us deliberate on this problem further. The periodic lattice gives rise to discrete location of points in reciprocal space in contrast to the quasilattice which would leave the reciprocal space uniformly and densely filled. It is important to note that the two conclusions are independent of the magnitude of lattice and quasilattice parameter(s). The effect of decoration by atoms in conformity with the requisite symmetry of the structures does not change the geometry of the reciprocal lattice of the former, but qualitatively affects the latter by making it discrete during diffraction analysis. Hence, we see the discrete point group invariance for both the cases. Thus, for any quasiperiodic order in a solid, there does not seem to be a point in discussing the content separately. Hence, the analogue of hypertwins observed in RAS is not possible for quasicrystals. We have emphasised the characterisation of various interfaces observed in IRS on the basis of hyperspace approach We have discussed the importance of hypercrystal approach for understanding the geometrical aspects of characterisation of heterophase and homophase interfaces in IRS. The consequence of 6D homophase and heterophase interfaces on the physical space has been brought out with the help of examples. These include RAS/IQC, IQC/DQC interfaces apart from the hypertwin and antiphase domain boundaries. We have also presented the problems pertaining to energetics in such a description in delineating the issue of role of interfaces in the microstructural evolution during the processing of such samples. We have finally come to the conclusion that 3D and hypercrystal structural description should supplement each other for unravelling the underlying mechanism of the growth of a particular interface. We have emphasised the importance of HREM studies of defect-free samples for a wide range of alloy systems to attain useful understanding in the challenging and fascinating area of interface characterisation in quasicrystalline and its related phases. Authors are grateful to Prof. G.V.S. Sastry and Dr. N.K. Mukhopadhyay for helpful discussion. One of us (RKM) thanks Profs. S. Ranganathan, K. Urban and H.R. Trebin for their encouragements and supports to enable him to attend ICQ7. He also acknowledges the financial help received from DFG (The German Science Foundation) for attending ICQ7 at Stuttgart (Germany).