In this work, primary test of ferrite formation by coprecipitation method from pure Fe(NO3)3⋅9H2O and FeSO4⋅7H2O were evaluated at different pH and temperature by continues stirring using magnetic stirrer. The optimized method was applied on simulated and real acid mine drainage (AMD). The impact of simultaneous removal of metals and sulphate on the magnetic moment of ferrite sludge and addition of ferrite or ferrite sludge seeds into real AMD samples were also investigated. The XRD results of synthesised ferrite from pure binary salts confirmed that presence of heat and increased pH improved the degree of crystallite of ferrite. During neutralization of AMD using sodium hydroxide, gypsum was not precipitated in the absence of calcium hydroxide or barium ions. Consequently, the two step processes were applied; whereby metals are removed in the first step via ferrite sludge formation using sodium hydroxide and followed by treatment of the filtrate with barium chloride or barium hydroxide for complete sulphate removal as barium sulphate precipitate. From the analysis results, the ferrite sludge produced separately from sulphate showed higher magnetic moments than produced simultaneously. In the pH range of 7–8.5, at temperature of 60°C, 93%, 12%, and 28%, and 99.6%, 57.5% and 47.5% of Fe, Mn and Co were removed from real AMD; in the absence and presence of ferrite seeds in 20min reaction time, respectively. Furthermore, the rate of metal removals and magnetic moments of synthesised ferrite sludge were increased in the presence of ferrite seeds. Generally, these results indicated that AMD could be used as a resource for production of commercially valuable chemicals, which in turn could help to offset the cost of treatment.Due to its environmental consequences, acid mine drainage (AMD) has been recognized as a major challenge to the worldwide mining industry ( Previous research indicates that possibility of incorporating metal ions into spinel structure of ferrite ( For pH adjustment, 1 Analytical grade chemicals containing 0.04 Simulated AMD was prepared from salts of CaCl The blanks containing ultrapure Milli-Q water and sodium hydroxide also run under similar condition. During sampling time, the surface of magnetic stirrer was well observed to confirm the presence or absence of any adhered magnetic particles. Regularly, 10 The stability of produced ferrite sludge was evaluated by leaching test taking 0.5 For the sulphate removal test, synthetic AMD water was prepared by dissolving soluble salts each containing 3.64 AMD was collected from South Africa gold mine area, and its pH, metal and sulphate content was determined. Based on the result of analysis, to achieve 2:1 trivalent to bivalent metallic ratio, Fe Trace metal ions present in the filtrate were determined using ICP-OES. Amount of each metal incorporated into ferrite sludge was determined by two methods. Indirectly, by subtracting the concentrations of each metals detected in the filtrate of sample taken at 60 In order to assess the accuracy of the result; the linearity of the calibration curve, repeatability of the analysis results and the presence of any target analyte in the blank solution was used. Quantification of metals using ICP-OES was done through an external standard having five calibration levels. A good linearity was obtained with XRD analysis result confirmed that formation of ferrite (mixture of magnetite (major), goethite (minor) and other ferrite forms) under all conditions. The main peaks at 2 Metal removals in the form of ferrite sludge are presented in The analysis results of experiment conducted at pH 11.9 showed that complete removal of metals after 10 The analysis result of samples taken at 10 At an average pH of 4.8 and 4.4, no differences in removal of metallic ions were observed. Under both conditions, in 20 Generally, the result showed slightly higher magnetic moment for ferrite sludge produced under open than closed conditions ( After leaching, the measured magnetic moment of ferrite sludge was decreased (from 5 The corresponding XRD patterns, SEM image, EDX spectrum and atomic percentage for the ferrite sludge synthesised at pH 11.9 are presented in The analysis result showed dependence of sulphate removal on pH and open or closed conditions. The concentration of sulphate in the solution decreased from the initial input of 2097 to 755, 698, 595, and 731 The experiment conducted under open condition at pH 11.9, was with low concentration of sulphate (768 The sample description, treatment options and the corresponding percentage removal for Fe, Mn and Co at 20 The two step treatment of AMD using sodium hydroxide and then the filtrate by barium chloride or barium hydroxide has got many benefits. As observed in this experiment, the advantage of addition of sodium hydroxide over lime or limestone are (1), relatively, ferrite sludge with higher magnetic moment can be produced (2), after cleaning the ferrite sludge could be used as seed (nuclei) to facilitate the formation of other ferrites for further removal of iron (II) and other trace metals from AMD or industrial wastewater (3), Less amount of sodium hydroxide is required to attain any favourable pH for the removal of metals. (4) Since formation of CaSO Once the metals are removed, treatment of sulphate concentrated filtrate with BaCl Generally, after further purification, both products of the two step process (ferrite sludge and BaSO In this study, ferrites were synthesised at pH higher than 7, increasing pH and heat improved the degree of crystallite of the ferrite. As the number of trace metals and their concentrations increased in solution, the complexities of trace metal removal through formation of ferrite or ferrite sludge were also escalated. Simultaneous removal of metals and sulphate resulted in decreased magnetic moment of ferrite sludge. Further, the sulphate removal study revealed the possibility of twice sulphate removal relative to the stoichiometric ratio of total mole of Ca(OH) The authors thank Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 