Mesoporous silica molecular sieves MCM-41 were synthesized under hydrothermal conditions. For this purpose, a solution with a molar coefficient of water, cetyltri-methyl ammonium bromide surfactants as template and sodium silicate as the source of SiO2 are used. Phase formation, morphology and gas absorption properties were investigated by XRD and BET analysis, respectively. The results showed that silica mesoporous material has been successfully synthesized. A favorable special surface and porosity volume together with regular arrangement of nano metric-hexagonal porosities were obtained from this synthesis. Thickness of the wall and average diameter of the pores are 0.8nm and 4nm, respectively.Since the discovery of MCM-41 by the Mobile Co. scientists at 1992 The objective of this study, mesoporous MCM-41 material with different content pH was synthesized using a hydrothermal method. The obtained material characterized by XRD, Nitrogen adsorption, and TEM methods. Hydrothermal method with regulation of pH of solution was used for the synthesis of mesoporous. An aqueous solution with a molar ratio of 5Sio In order to synthesis the mesoporous sample, 55 g of CTAB was first heated in 1 litter of distilled water so that the color of the solution be clear. Then, 56 g of sodium silicate was added to it. Next, the solution was poured into a poly-ethylene bottle. The crystalline phase identification and phase purity determination of the calcined MCM-41 samples were carried out by XRD (Philips, Holland) using nickel filtered CuKα radiation (L=0.15406 The results of the low angle range of XRD patterns of all samples are briefly summarized in Similar results have already been reported by other researchers By comparing  The observed (210) reflection in Me The hexagonal structure of the pores had also lesser change and displacement in comparison with two other samples. The hexagonal structure of MCM-41 finds a better solidarity and a longer order. The appearance of the high peak related to the (100) reflection is an indication of perfect order of the hexagonal structure of mesoporous. Other researcher obtained similar result in this regard The hexagonal unit cell parameter (a Absorption isotherm of the all synthesized samples with different of pH were shown in The structure of MCM-41 is shown in The silica molecular sieves of MCM-41 mesoporous were synthesized successfully. It was carried out with a high regularity, different amounts of pH, using hydrothermal method and continuous regulation of the amount of pH. Results indicated that the regularity of MCM-41 is not satisfactory when a large amount of pH is used. The results of various investigations indicated that regularity of crystal structure of hexagonal increases by decreasing the amount of pH. The results of BET test indicate the composition of mesoporous with a regular and large distribution of the pores. The specific surface of created mesoporous is 1050–1070 This work was supported by