Zeolite Na–X (FAU type) was synthesized from F-class fly ash in simple and economical way. Several months of storage of fly ash in NaOH solution, at room temperature, without any prior treatment, results in the production of material with ca. 50% content of Na–X zeolite. The most efficient reaction takes place at (OH)− activity of 0.1–0.15 mol (OH)−/g of ash and at S/L ratio of 33 to 67 g/dm3. Higher S/L value causes an accelerating dissolution–crystallization equilibrium attainment. Cl− ion acts as the inhibitor of this reaction.
                  Na–X crystals show Si/Al ratios of framework in the range of 1.14 to 1.45. Zeolite content controls the micropore volume and the surface area of the samples, limiting the ethylene glycol monoethyl ether (EGME) retention and the cation exchange capacity (CEC) values. The temperature of pre-heating is a crucial factor for the amount of retained EGME. Insufficient dehydration at 250 °C (as in conventional procedure for clays) does not allow EGME molecules to enter all micropores. Pre-heating at 400 °C causes EGME adsorption on all available surfaces. EGME molecule occupation area is ca. 41 Å2, using BET algorithm and ca. 52 Å2 for Langmuir equation, or package ratio 16 Å3/1 EGME molecule if calculating adsorption as mechanism of micropores infilling. Total CEC value (including sodalite cages) of materials rich in Na–X zeolite, measured using Ba2+ and Mg2+ cations is ca. 2.5 meq/g. Exchange positions available for [Co(NH3)6]3+ cation occur only inside 12-ring space and loops of FAU framework (secondary building unit — SBU). They produce CEC which attains almost 1.2 meq/g, following directly the development of microporous texture. Produced materials reach maximum N2-BET surface area 344 m2/g from 15.3 m2/g of raw fly ash. Simple procedure of EGME retention can be successfully used to determine microporous texture of X zeolite available to organic molecules.Zeolite X (FAU; classification and nomenclature after Searching for a way to lower significantly the costs and simplify the procedure of production of zeolite X from fly ash, we made successful experiments of synthesis of Na–X zeolite at room temperature. Such synthesis, of efficiency comparable to hydrothermal reactions, requires a long time, according to the relationship described by The retention of EGME is a useful technique for determination of the total surface area (TSA) of expandable clay minerals ( The cobalt (III) hexamine chloride was already tested for the determination of CEC of Na–X zeolite, bringing unclear results. Material rich in FAU phase showed very different values of CEC while measured by conventional methodology and with [Co(NH This study focuses on the transformation of fly ash into material rich in Na–X zeolite, at room temperature and on the determination of its composition and textural properties. Retention of EGME was measured applying the conventional and modified techniques used for phyllosilicate clay minerals, in order to check relations between textural properties and retention. Other aim of this work is to explain the reaction of [Co(NH Fresh fly ash from the “Elektrociepłownia Kraków” power plant (Cracow, Poland), that was used in the experiments, is a typical F-class fly ash with a following composition: aluminosilicate glass (40–50%), mullite (below 30%), quartz (5–7%), unburned coaly matter (below 7%). Fe oxides, gypsum, calcite, feldspars and apatite are minor components ( 10 g samples of homogenized raw fly ash were treated with solutions of various concentrations of sodium hydroxide and sodium chloride, at solid-to-liquid ratios (S/L) from 25 to 100 g/dm The mineral composition of all samples was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Philips X'pert APD and Thermo XTRA diffractometers. The identification of phases was based on ICDD PDF-2 database and the collection of patterns recommended by International Zeolite Association ( Observations of the reaction products and the analyses of chemical composition in micro-range were carried out using field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) HITACHI S-4700 equipped with energy dispersive spectrometry (EDS) system VANTAGE NORAN. CEC was determined using simple and quick method employing cobalt (III) hexamine chloride, described by Sorption of EGME ( For measurements of the surface area and pore volume the ASAP 2405 instrument (Micromeritics) was used. The instrument performs physical adsorption and desorption of gases using programming provided by Micromeritics. All procedures are workable with nitrogen and helium, and also with krypton for low surface areas. Before analysis the samples were degassed at 350 °C for 24 h until the pressure in the tubes is stabilized at 2 Application of low-temperature (ca. 22 °C) treatment resulted in the synthesis of a Na–X (FAU type, identification based on: ICDD card 38-0237, and The low-temperature synthesis was carried out in two ways. In the first one, constant solid-to-liquid ratio (25 g/dm In the second experiment we tested various S/L ratios (33 to 100 g/dm The SEM images of Na–X crystals are presented in (Na (Na (Na They suggest small amount of aluminum as potentially exchangeable cation. Predominant, extra-framework cation is Na, thus the synthesized X phase can be considered as Na–X. The crystallization of Na–X from fly ash causes increase of CEC values measured with cobalt (III) hexamine cation, from 0.055 to ca 1.20 meq/g ( The adsorption of EGME was measured according to the procedure used for the determination of total surface area (TSA) for phyllosilicates ( Wide range of textural parameters was calculated using N The sample ECK 52 was measured also after pre-heating in vacuum at lower temperature (200 °C), than commonly used. Textural properties measured in such conditions were worse than after heating at 350 °C, reaching > Acid-resistance test of the Na–X produced from fly ash showed that this phase is extremely unstable. Treating with 20% H Classical regularity of X zeolite synthesis, described by Experiments showed that the synthesis of Na–X phase at room temperature depends strongly on (OH) Zeolite X shows low Si/Al ratio. This provides very high CEC values (exchangeable cations outside framework). Complying a minor part of Al as exchangeable cation, framework Si/Al ratio is slightly higher than Si/Al ratio measured in a whole crystal: 1.14 for EcnT 3, 1.20 for Eck 52, and 1.45 for EcnT 8 sample. CEC values of these samples calculated upon framework Si/Al ratios are 6.83, 6.60, and 6.11 meq/g of dehydrated material, respectively Increase of the N The lower temperature of pre-heating is insufficient for complete desorption of microporous cavities, providing 15% decrease of expected value. The mesoporous and external surface areas stay almost stable while pre-heating in vacuum was done in the lower temperature. The isotherms of zeolitic samples show uprise at the highest values of The CEC values measured with [Co(NH The results of EGME retention show effect of pre-heating temperature parallel to insufficient dehydration before nitrogen adsorption: samples preheated at 400 °C adsorb more EGME than ones preheated at 250 °C. Thus EGME It is clear that EGME retention linearly depends on the Na–X content ( The EGME retention is linear with respect to the CEC ( Zeolite Na–X can be easily synthesized in a big quantity from fly ash, without providing heat energy for fusion or the conventional synthesis. The storage in NaOH solution for several months is necessary to obtain material of ca. 50% rich in zeolite, of mass close to the initial mass of fly ash. The most efficient reaction takes place while (OH) Synthesized at various conditions, the Na–X zeolite shows variability of framework Si/Al ratio in the range of 1.14 to 1.45. Zeolite content controls the micropore volume and the surface area of the samples, limiting EGME retention (from 14.5 to 136.4 mg/g) and CEC values. Temperature of pre-heating is a crucial factor for the amount of retained EGME. Insufficient dehydration at 250 °C (as in conventional procedure for clays) does not allow EGME molecules to enter whole microporous structure. Pre-heating at 400 °C causes EGME adsorption on all available surfaces. EGME molecule occupation area is ca. 41 Å The authors thank Jan Środoń for his instructions and Reinhard Kleeberg for his help with AutoQuan and BGMN operations. This work was financially supported by the Polish Ministry of Education and Science, grant no 4 T12B 042 29 and by the scientific project no 2.5/2005 of the Institute of Geological Sciences, Polish Academy of Sciences.