When faults form and slip they produce granular wear material that accommodates most of the strain. We investigate the effect of grain size and grain size distribution on slip dynamics by using sheared elliptical acrylic discs as a fault gouge proxy. Physical experiments on three different grain size assemblages are performed in a spring slider apparatus. Our results indicate that below a grain diameter threshold of 1/10 of the shear zone width, increasing grain size corresponds to faster slip velocities during slip events. In experiments with more than one grain size, the relative proportions of grain sizes and effective grain sizes control the bulk behavior. We show that shear zones with grains that are larger than 1/10 of the shear zone width show deformation dynamics that are independent of the small grain fraction. In shear zones where the grain sizes are below this threshold a high abundance of small grains promotes slower and smaller slip events.Due to the presence of fault gouge and wear material in most fault zones, deformation of granular material has been used as a proxy for slip dynamics of natural faults (e.g., Frictional forces along faults break wall rock into wear material of various sizes ranging from coarse fault breccia to very fine ultracataclasite (  We shear elliptical, acrylic discs of three sizes in a volume conserving simple shear machine ( The sliding side of the table is driven by a stepper motor that pulls a spring at a constant velocity of 0.167 mm/s. The spring (k = 75 N/m) is attached to the mobile side of the apparatus and allows the system to respond elastically to frictional interactions of the grains ( The grains show negligible elastic deformation (bulk elastic modulus = 3 GPa) and no comminution at the stresses acting in the experiments. Even after multiple experiments we do not detect any scratches or polishing effects. Before each experiment, the grains are redistributed by hand to ensure no fabric or shape preferred alignment carries over from one experiment to the next. We set and record the global packing density and numbers of grains of each grain size before each experiment ( In a first experimental series, we perform experiments with homogeneous grain sizes (all small, all medium, or all large). In a second series, we mix grains and use three variations (25%–75%, 50%–50%, and 75%–25%) for combinations of small and medium, and medium and large grains. To account for variability between individual experiments we run each experiment ~10 times. To ensure that the recorded signal is indeed resulting from the grain interaction we record the force and displacement curves of the empty apparatus. Experiments with no grains display no slip events, the displacement and velocity curves are linear and smooth ( In the first experimental series, we shear each grain size separately with percent global void space held constant. At a global void space of 13.0% of the total experiment area, large grains show a stick-slip signal ( In all experiments where we observe a stick-slip signal grain size impacts the onset, frequency, and velocity of slip events. We do not see any stick slip events during the first approximately 250 s of all the experiments. During this time the system is strengthening and builds a force chain network that is able to support shear forces ( Experiments containing a mixture of small and medium grains are conducted at a global void space of 9.75% ( Experiments with a mixture of medium and large grains were conducted with a global void space of 11.8%. While experiments containing 75% medium sized grains show a higher percentage of slow slip velocities, the three different grain size distributions are otherwise very similar to each other. The first slip events occur between 250 and 280 s for all three grain size combinations. We do not detect a significant change in maximum speed between the different grain size distributions. The average grain size to shear zone width ratio is 0.078 for 75% medium grains, 0.088 for 50% medium grains, and 0.11 for 25% medium grains ( The experiments presented here belong to the category of spring slider experiments, which have been used before to investigate granular behavior ( In our experiments we observe that the local void space is heterogeneous and differs from the global average. The dilation of tightly packed granular systems under shear is a well-documented phenomenon (e.g., During slip events grains rearrange and move past each other. This motion takes place via rearrangement of force chains, slipping of grains next to each other and some minor rotation of grains. Since reorganization of the grains is accommodated by grains sliding and rotating, the grain size has an impact on how the granular material deforms ( Soil engineering practice mandates that in direct shear experiments the largest grains should not be >1/10 the height of the shear apparatus ( The grain sizes for the experiments were chosen deliberately on both sides of the 1/10 ratio. Natural fault zones are thought to develop a fractal grain size distribution at high strains because the probability of grain fracturing depends on the relative size of the grains nearest neighbors (  Displacement, force, and local void space are measured during shear experiments of granular systems. We use grains of three sizes to investigate the impact of the grain size to shear zone width ratio and grain size distribution on slip dynamics. We observe an increase in local void space in the center of the experiment when compared to the global void space. We do not however observe a significant increase of the local void space close to the velocity jump in the shear apparatus. The experiments show that below a grain size to shear zone width ratio of 1/10, an increase in grain size corresponds to an increase in slip velocities where the proportion of grains of each size controls the bulk behavior. Experiments containing grains with a diameter larger than 1/10 of the shear zone width show a decrease in slip velocity even when the average grain size diameter increases. This indicates that the presence of large grains has an impact on the deformation dynamics because of their interaction with the boundaries. We show that not only the range of grain sizes but also the relative proportion is relevant for the slip behavior. We propose that shear zones containing grains larger than 1/10 of the shear zone width show deformation dynamics that are independent of the fraction of smaller grains. In shear zones where all grains are smaller than 1/10 of the shear zone width a high abundance of smaller grains promotes smaller slip events. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has partially been funded by a