Monovalent cations permselective membranes (MCPMs) which can selectively transport monovalent and reject the multivalent cations are key materials for waste water treatment, mining of valuable seawater metal ions, acid recovery in hydrometallurgy etc. High flux and good selectivity are desired characteristics for practical applications of MCPMs. In this study, we have synthesized functionalized MCPMs containing zwitterionic side chain comprising two quaternary ammonium groups and one sulfonic acid group. Distinct nano-phase separation between aromatic main chain and the ionic side chains was observed by the atomic force microscopy. The resulting MCPMs showed excellent H+ flux (16.92 mol h−1m−2) in electrodialysis (ED) process. Because the electrostatic repulsive effect of zwitterionic structure, the synthesized MCPM exhibits excellent Na+/Mg2+ selectivity of 7.4 and remarkably good H+/Zn2+ selectivity of 23.5.Monovalent cation perm-selective membranes Poly (2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) Synthesized zwitterionic polyelectrolytes Synthesized tertiary amine terminated polymer precursor N,N,N′,N′-tetramethyl-1,6-hexanediamine Ion exchange capacity Anion exchange capacity Cation exchange capacity AEC calculated by elemental analysis AEC calculated by titration CEC calculated by elemental analysis CEC calculated by titration Tensile strength Elongation at break Atomic force microscopy Fast growing resource shortage and environmental pollution are future challenges for scientific community and development of highly efficient resource recovery and pollutant treatment technologies are necessary. Monovalent cations permselective membranes (MCPMs) are attracting increasing attentions for waste water treatment, recovery of seawater metal ions, and acid recovery in hydrometallurgy etc. In contrast to the surface modifications, incorporation of positively charged moieties into the backbone of membrane matrix can be a suitable option to electrostatically reject the multivalent cations to improve selectivity at comparatively high cations fluxes. Similar membrane repulsion approaches have been tried in vanadium redox flow battery in order to suppress the permeation of V Inspired by the mentioned strategies, we have designed the MCPMs with the zwitterionic (partially positive and partially negatively charged) side chains to balance the cations flux and their selectivity to improve the membrane performance. The long side chains densely functionalized with hydrophilic sulfonic acid and quaternary ammonium groups produced at hydrophobic polymer main chain ( Brominated poly (2,6-dimethyl-1,4-phenylene oxide) (BPPO) and the tertiary amine terminated polymer precursor TMAQAPPO were synthesized according to previous literatures 1,3-propanesultone (1.5 equiv) was added to a stirred solution of TMAQAPPO (1 g in 20 mL NMP) and stirred at 60 ℃ for 24 h. The SBQAPPO polymer was precipitated into ethyl acetate, filtered, washed with ethyl acetate for three times and then dried under vacuum at room temperature for 24 h. NMR spectrum of SBQAPPO (employing DMSO- 1 g of the SBQAPPO was dissolved into 15 mL NMP, a uniform solution was casted onto a clean glass plate and heated at 60 ℃ for 24 h. The resulting transparent membrane was peeled off and named as SBQAPPO-x, here x is indicating the IEC values. Electrodialysis experiments ( The permselectivity ( Ideal and scalable monovalent cation perm-selective membranes (MCPMs) demand for facile membrane synthesis procedure and low cost raw materials. Subsequently, the terminal tertiary amine groups of TMAQAPPO were reacted with 1,3-propanesultone resulting formation of the zwitterionic polymer SBQAPPO. The NMR spectrum ( Due to the zwitterionic nature of the MCPMs, the ion exchange capacity (IEC) was composed of the anion exchange capacity (AEC, millimole number of quaternary ammonium group per gram of dry membrane) and cation exchange capacity (CEC, millimole number of sulfonic acid group per gram of dry membrane). In this study, AEC and CEC of the membranes were determined by the elemental analysis as well as the titration method. As summarized in Ion exchange membranes absorb water due to hydrophilicity of ion conducting groups in the membrane matrix. Water uptake certainly lowers the dimensional stability and mechanical strength but it is necessary to maintain sufficient IEC for required cationic flux. Conventional, crosslinking strategy can beat the trade-off effect between cationic flux and dimensional stability of the membranes Mechanical properties of the prepared MCPMs were investigated by their tensile strength (TS) and elongation at break (E As discussed earlier, hydrophobic-hydrophilic characteristics of the MCPMs are necessary for efficient cations permeation and selectivity. Herein, hydrophobicity due to aromatic main chain and hydrophilicity of densely functionalized zwitterionic side chains ( The industrial process like the hydrometallurgy, electroplating and circuit board etching generate waste acid containing heavy metal ions (Zn The SBQAPPO-2 membrane improved the fluxes for both mono- and divalent cations but simultaneously lowered the selectivity compared with SBQAPPO-1 membrane which is due to its higher IEC value. Despite a high cationic flux for SBQAPPO-2 membrane compared with the CSO High separation efficiency between the alkali metal ions and divalent cations is also desired for practical applications. For example, the edible-salt production from seawater contains a pre-concentration process by electro-dialysis. High permselective toward monovalent ions allows the concentration of NaCl and simultaneous retention of divalent ions such as Mg Compared with CSO Low cation transport number of zwitterionic membrane was also reported in previous literatures. Bruening and co-workers once reported a cation selective membrane through layer by layer coating of poly (sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) /protonated poly (allylamine) In this study, unique zwitterionic side chains were designed to prepare nano-phase separated monovalent cations permselective membranes. The zwitterionic membranes were prepared from low cost starting materials under the mild reaction conditions. The “ionic crosslinking” effect provided an acceptable dimensional stability and mechanical strength at high IEC values. The constructed well-designed ion conducting channels provided high H This research was supported in part by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 