Refined tin is produced from ores, concentrates, and recycled materials. Tin is one of the oldest metals known to man and its use, particularly in bronze (a tin–copper alloy), dates from about 3500 BC. The Bronze Age started in Egypt and reached Britain by about 1800 BC. Until the nineteenth century, much of the tin used in the western world was mined in Cornwall, but tin mining there ceased in 1998. Annual world mine production is typically about 205000–225000 tonnes. Southeast Asian and South American countries were long the major tin producers, but China is now the dominant source. Secondary tin is an important source at about 25% of American supply, and globally accounts for near 10% of production. About 70 tin-bearing minerals are known; most are sulfides, the rest being oxides, hydroxides, silicates, and stannides. By far the most important tin mineral is cassiterite (SnO Primary deposits of tin are typically found in acid igneous rocks such as granites, pegmatites, and aplites, and in associated intrusions and replacements. Such deposits are exploited in Peru, Bolivia, and Australia. The main sources of tin, however, are secondary concentrations (placers) of cassiterite formed by weathering and erosion, widely found in southeast Asia, China, and Brazil. World economic resources total about 7 million tonnes of tin, most of which are in Asia—China (27%), Brazil (16%), Malaysia (15%), Thailand (12%), Indonesia (10%), and Bolivia (6%). Primary tin deposits are mined by normal hard-rock mining methods. The ore typically contains cassiterite and sulfide minerals, and this is treated by crushing, grinding, sulfide flotation, and recovery of cassiterite by both flotation and gravity concentration (using spirals, shaking tables, and heavy-medium separation). The sulfides can contain significant proportions of lead, copper, arsenic, antimony, bismuth, and indium. Tin is also a coproduct of large tin–tantalum mining operations. Placer deposits are typically mined by bucket-line dredging based on large floating dredges. Primary concentration on the dredge uses gravity methods such as spirals, shaking tables, and jigs. Smaller deposits and those unsuitable for dredging are mined by washing out with a high-pressure water jet from a nozzle or monitor, and gravel pumping of the alluvium. In southeast Asia, gravel-pumping operations often use for primary concentration a long, gently sloping, wooden sluice box or ‘‘palong.’’ Primary tin concentrate is further processed in a secondary concentrator or ‘‘tin shed’’ involving wet and dry gravity methods, magnetic and electrostatic separation, and liquid–solid separation. By-products can include ilmenite, rutile, zircon, monazite, xenotime, and struverite. Tin recovery to final concentrate varies widely, from about 50% in small simple operations to up to 80% or higher in efficient operations. Recovery from placer deposits tends to be higher than from hard-rock deposits. Concentrate grade from placer deposits may be 70–75% tin, while those from hard rock mining are typically lower at 40–60%. The extractive metallurgy of tin is complicated by tin’s affinity for iron, and by the need to achieve good metallurgical recovery because of tin’s high unit value. Tin has a low melting point of 232 °C, but the smelting temperatures needed are quite high. Sulfide concentrates can first be roasted to oxidize sulfides to oxides. The process is performed in a rotary kiln or multi-hearth roaster using additional fuel—either oil or natural gas. Care is taken to limit oxidation so that formation of sulfates is avoided. Chloridizing roasting with the addition of sodium chloride is practiced in Thailand to produce a calcine that is lower in lead and bismuth, through the volatility of their chlorides. A roast–leach process may also be used to treat such concentrates. However, tin also forms volatile chlorides, so the mixed chloride fume from the process contains much tin, and poses problems in further treatment. More recent practice is for sulfide concentrates to be smelted directly in a sulfide fuming process. In established smelting practice, cassiterite concentrate or calcine is mixed with flux, recycled fume, and excess coal, and is then charged to a batch-operated furnace. The main reactions are: In the early twentieth century, smelting of cassiterite concentrate was done in a blast (or shaft) furnace, using coke as the reductant. The blast furnace was replaced by the reverberatory furnace, which became common before World War II. Typically a charge of up to 70 tonnes is treated, using silica sand and limestone as fluxes in a two-stage process. In the first stage, relatively mild reduction at 1150–1200 °C produces a fairly pure metal of about 96% tin with low iron content, but low tin recovery to metal results in a slag containing 20–25% tin. The temperature 1150–1200°C is required to produce a liquid calcium–iron–tin silicate slag. The metal is tapped from the furnace for further processing. In the second stage, first-stage slag is strongly reduced with more reductant at a higher temperature of 1400 °C or above. Tin in slag is reduced to about 1%, but significant quantities of iron are also reduced into the metal phase, which is a tin–iron alloy called ‘‘hard-head,’’ containing 20% or more iron. The slag may be further treated by fuming, or discarded and the hard-head is recycled. Rotary kilns and electric resistance (submerged arc) furnaces are also used for tin smelting. In modern practice, second-stage reduction is replaced by tin slag fuming, in which tin leaves the slag bath as the volatile gas SnS. The addition of calcium sulfate to the charge promotes the reaction Since the mid-1980s, the Sirosmelt process has become widely adopted as a simple bath smelting unit with a vertical submerged lance. Sirosmelt is used for two-stage reduction smelting, for fuming, and for direct fuming of low-grade concentrates, fumes, and plant recycles. The process is used for tin smelting in Peru and China, and has the advantage of high-intensity processing, low capital cost, and flexibility. Tin refining practice is rather similar to that for lead. A range of specifications for tin are available: ASTM (US) offers six grades from 99.00% to 99.98% purity tin. Tin traded on the London Metal Exchange (LME) must be a minimum 99.85% purity. The product quality target for a smelter depends on both market and process economics. On cooling molten tin to just above its melting point, iron exceeds its solubility limit, and separates as an iron-bearing dross which also contains FeSn and FeSn The arsenic level in the tin may then be about 0.1%. Arsenic and antimony are removed by adding aluminum at near the melting point of aluminum (660 °C) and cooling back to 350–400 °C. A voluminous dross is formed, and this is centrifuged to recover entrained tin. An aluminum–tin alloy can be used to allow operation at a lower temperature. Residual aluminum is removed by the stirring in of ammonium chloride, sodium metal, sodium hydroxide, chlorine, or steam. Bismuth content can be lowered to 0.003–0.06% by addition of calcium and magnesium. These elements, together with residual levels of lead, bismuth, zinc, and aluminum, can be addressed by chlorination at just above the tin melting point. Although tin loss to the chloride slag can be considerable, lead–tin solders can be produced from the chloride slags. In China, a continuous crystallizer is applied to tin–lead separation. The practice of tin refining in kettles has been improved considerably by use of a centrifuge to remove drosses automatically. Vacuum distillation can be applied for the removal of lead and bismuth. Electrolytic refining of tin is practiced in several smelters. The impure tin is cast into anodes, and the cathodes are starter sheets of pure tin. However, simple sulfate or chloride electrolytes yield poor cathodic deposits, even with organic addition agents and low current densities. Electrorefining is useful to recover gold and silver, as well as copper, bismuth, arsenic, and antimony in anode slimes. The electrolytes cresylphenylsulfonic acid and cresylsulfonic acid are used successfully. Electrorefining in an alkaline electrolyte is possible, but requires a high temperature of 90 °C and low current density, and suffers from poor power utilization. Tin recycling continues to grow in importance. Sources include tinplate trimmings, bearing metals, tinplate cans, old scrap of bronze items, soldered ware such as automobile radiators, and electronic scrap. Most old scrap material, which may be shredded before treatment, is processed by manufacturers of lead–tin alloys; this processing relies on the solubility of tin in lead. Scrap bronze may be remelted into bronze alloys of various grades. Tinplate scrap from can manufacture, and clean tinplate can scrap which contains about 0.5% tin, can be detinned by dissolving the tin coating with hot caustic soda and sodium nitrate. In this hydrometallurgical process, tin in solution as sodium stannate can be recovered by cathodic deposition in an electrolytic cell. The cathode tin is then melted and cast as ingots. Low-grade tin-bearing slags, fumes, and residues are also treated by sulfide fuming of slag, a process which relies on the volatility of tin sulfide (SnS). The USA is the major producer of secondary tin, and provided 8600 In tin beneficiation, the main new technology being adopted is the high-gravity concentrator, examples being the Kelsey jig, Falcon and Knelson concentrators, and the Mozley multigravity separator. Radical change in tin smelting and refining technology is not expected. In smelting, use of the TBRC and the Sirosmelt technologies will be more widely adopted, using fuming instead of reduction smelting for second-stage processing. Economies of scale are leading to the dominance of a few large smelters in countries such as China, Malaysia, and Bolivia. Refining technology will in general continue to rely on the same chemical principles, but will see greater adoption of automated technology such as the centrifuge for dross removal, and the vacuum process. Hydrometallurgical technologies may make an impact with developments in ion exchange, solvent extraction, and biooxidation and reduction. A major application for tin is in tinplate for food canning. The old hot-dipping method is little used, having been replaced by continuous electrolytic tinning of sheet steel. Tin coating thickness on one or both sheet surfaces ranges from about 0.4 to 2.1 Since the early 1990s, both mine and smelter production of tin in China have more than doubled; Indonesia and Vietnam increased production, while that in Malaysia, Thailand, and the UK declined significantly. Mine production in 1998 was sourced mainly from China (38.4%), Indonesia (19.4%), Peru (12.5%), Brazil (8.9%), Bolivia (5.5%), and Australia (5.0%), these countries accounting for almost 90% of the 206000t mined. Malaysia remains a major tin smelting country. In the decade from 1990 annual tin production in Russia declined dramatically to about 4500 During the period 1990–1998, the LME annual average tin price per tonne was in the range $5137–6194. In real terms since 1960, some periods of higher prices lasting 3–4 years have occurred, but the period 1974–1984 saw much higher prices, when the International Tin Council attempted to fund price maintenance. The ITC failed in October 1985, and as a result the LME did not trade in tin from then until mid-1989. Tin volumes traded on the Kuala Lumpur Tin Market declined significantly following closure of some Malaysian smelting capacity in 1998. 