Purpose
                  We have introduced a method of modified posterior short-segment pedicle screw fixation and evaluated its clinical effects in treating lumbar burst fractures with incomplete neurological deficits.
               
                  Methods
                  The data from 22 patients with lumbar burst fracture and incomplete neurological deficits who had undergone modified posterior short-segment instrumentation with Schanz screw fixation from January 2012 to February 2018 in our clinic were evaluated in the present retrospective study. All Schanz screws were implanted in an oblique downward direction into the vertebrae above and below the injured vertebra (insertion depth, 90%–100%). The implants were removed ∼
                     1 year after surgery. Neurological function, back pain, anterior and posterior body height ratio, kyphosis angle, percentage of canal compromise, fracture severity, and treatment-related complications were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  Technical success was achieved in all 22 patients. No infection, instrument loosening or failure, or breakage was observed. Statistically significant improvements with regard to the anterior body height (P < 0.05) and posterior body height (P < 0.05) ratios, kyphosis angle, and percentage of canal compromise (P < 0.05) were observed at 1 week postoperatively or the final follow-up visit. No correction loss had occurred at the final follow-up examination. Postoperatively, all patients with neurological deficits had functional improvement equivalent to ≥1 grade on the American Spinal Injury Association impairment scale and fracture union. Back pain was greatly improved postoperatively.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Short-segment Schanz screw fixation implanted in an oblique downward direction seems to be a promising method for lumbar burst fractures with incomplete neurological deficits because it provided good clinical and radiographic outcomes.Thoracolumbar burst fracture is a common injury of the spine. A number of available classification systems have been proposed for thoracolumbar spinal injuries, with the goal of facilitating communication and streamlining the selection of the optimal treatment strategies. These systems include the Magerl/Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) thoracolumbar classification system, In recent years, short-segment posterior instrumentation with pedicle screws introduced 1 level below and 1 level above the fractured vertebra has become the most commonly surgical technique because it offers the advantage of preserving motion of the spinal segments, a shorter operative time, less blood loss, and less invasiveness. McCormack et al. The present study has introduced a novel method of modified posterior short-segment pedicle screw fixation and evaluated the clinical effects of this method in treating A3 lumbar burst fractures (LSC score, ≥7 and TL AOSIS score, >5) with incomplete neurological deficits. Four Schanz screws were placed, all in an oblique downward direction into the vertebrae above and below the injured vertebrae with an insertion depth of 90%–100%. No additional techniques, such as canal decompression, screw instrumentation, or augmentation at the injured vertebrae, were performed. Our technique achieved good clinical and radiographic outcomes. The ethics committee of the Affiliated Zhongshan Hospital of Dalian University approved the study, which was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All the patients provided written informed consent before the surgical procedures and for the use of their personal information for research purposes. From January 2012 to February 2018, 22 patients with an unstable lumbar burst fracture (AO type A3) with an LSC score of ≥7 and TL AOSIS score >5, associated with an incomplete neurological deficit were treated with modified temporary short-segment Schanz pedicle screw fixation in our hospital. All 22 patients were included in the present retrospective study. Fracture severity was assessed using the LSC, The inclusion criteria were as follows: 1) a single-level type A3 burst fracture using to the Magerl/AO classification The exclusion criteria were as follows: 1) fractures associated with a complete neurologic deficit; 2) the presence of congenital vertebral anomalies; 3) the presence of severe degenerative spinal disease; 4) previous spinal surgery; 5) the presence of osteoporosis; 6) concurrent fracture of a lower limb; 7) burst fracture at L4 or L5; and 8) patient refusal to wear a thoracolumbosacral orthosis (TLSO), an adjunctive therapy to reduce displacement and pressure on the injured vertebrae before new bone formation to reduce correction loss. Preoperatively, all patients had undergone anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, CT (Siemens; slice thickness, 1.0 mm), and MRI (Philips 1.5T NT; Achieva) at the lumbar vertebrae. All surgical procedures were performed with the patients under controlled general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation by the same surgical group. The patients were placed in the prone position. Under G-arm fluoroscopic guidance, a standard posterior midline approach was applied to expose the levels above and below the fractured vertebra. Subperiosteal dissection was performed to expose the surgical field. We only exposed the medial side of the laminae of the injured vertebrae near the spinous process. The lateral border of the laminae was not exposed. Attention should be given to protect the supraspinous ligament and interspinous ligaments during the subperiosteal dissection. The screw placement was performed using a Roy-Camille method. The screw entrance point should be situated at the crossing of 2 lines on a typical bony crest. The horizontal line should pass through the middle of the transverse process; the vertical line is given by the articular process 1 mm under the facet joint. None of the patients underwent decompression, laminectomy, or laminotomy. In addition, bone grafts of the injured vertebrae and vertebroplasty were not conducted. Finally, cross-links were not used. Antibiotic treatment with an intravenous first- or second-generation cephalosporin was administered for 72 hours postoperatively to prevent infection. The drainage tubes were removed 48–72 hours after surgery. A TLSO was applied and was required to be used for ≥3 months. The implants were generally removed ∼12 months after surgery when fracture union had been confirmed by the radiographic and CT scan findings. After screw removal, use of the lumbar back brace was continued for ≥4 weeks. All patients were evaluated clinically and radiographically using standing anteroposterior and lateral radiographs and CT scans at 1 week after surgery, 12 months after surgery (approximately the week after implant removal), and at the final follow-up visit. Fracture healing was defined as the disappearance of the fracture lines among the cortical bone on the anteroposterior and lateral radiographs and CT scans of the injured vertebrae. The duration from injury to surgery, operative time, blood loss, and intraoperative and postoperative complications were all recorded. Back pain was assessed using the Denis pain scale The radiographs and CT images were assessed independently. The radiographic parameters were measured, and the mean value was quantified. The screw insertion angle was measured between the screw shaft axis and superior endplate of the instrumented vertebrae on the standing radiograph at 1 week after surgery ( The ABH of the injured vertebra, superior vertebra, and inferior vertebra was measured on the lateral radiograph preoperatively, at 1 week postoperatively, and at the final follow-up examination. The percentage of the ABH was calculated using the following formula: ABH ratio = ABH/[(superior vertebra ABH + inferior vertebra ABH)/2] × 100 ( The vertebral body angle (VBA) or local kyphosis (LK) angle was measured between the superior and inferior endplates of the injured vertebra using the Cobb method on the lateral radiograph preoperatively, at 1 week postoperatively, and at the final follow-up examination. The spinal canal compromise was measured on the CT scans preoperatively, 1 week postoperatively, and at the final follow-up examination. The percentage of canal compromise was calculated using the follow formula: a = (1 − x/y) × 100 ( Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software, version 20.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, New York, USA). Continuous variables are presented as the mean ± standard deviation. Categorical variables are expressed as numbers and/or percentages. Differences were analyzed using the Student A total of 22 patients were included in the present study. The patients included 10 men and 12 women. The mean age of the patients was 45.7 ± 13.6 years (range, 20–62). The injuries had been caused by traffic accidents (5 patients) or a fall from a significant height (17 patients). Thus, all patients had experienced high-energy trauma. Of the vertebral fractures, L1 was the most commonly injured vertebra ( The mean time from injury to surgery was 4.3 ± 1.8 days (range, 3–10). The mean operative time and estimated blood loss were 93.7 ± 11.1 minutes (range, 80–115) and 188.6 ± 57.6 mL (range, 125–300), respectively. All patients had a mean follow-up duration of 30.3 ± 5.9 months (range, 20–40). Using the ASIA classification, preoperative neurological function was graded as B for 3 patients, C for 7 patients, and D for 12 patients. At the final follow-up visit, the neurological function was recorded as C for 2 patients, D for 5 patients, and E for 15 patients. All patients had improved neurologically by ≥1 ASIA grade by the final follow-up examination ( Using the Denis classification for back pain, 19 patients had had moderate to severe pain and 3 had had moderate back pain. At the final follow-up examination, 10 reported moderate pain and 12 reported no back pain ( No patient experienced iatrogenic neurological deficits or developed infection. Also, instrumentation failure such as breakage, bending, or loosening of the pedicle screws was not observed in any patient during the follow-up period. Finally, no additional procedures were needed. The mean insertion angle of the superior and inferior screws adjacent to the injured vertebrae was 7.45° ± 3.08° and 10.25° ± 3.80°, respectively ( The mean ABH was increased from 17.84 ± 4.21 mm preoperatively to 28.34 ± 3.02 mm at 1 week postoperatively ( The mean VBA or LK angle had decreased from 17.62° ± 5.09° preoperatively to 5.14° ± 1.98° at 1 week postoperatively ( The mean percentage of canal compromise was reduced from 51.82% ± 12.80% preoperatively to 11.86% ± 6.34% postoperatively ( Previous reported studies have suggested that a series of surgical methods such as the anterior approach, a combination of the anterior and posterior approach, and the posterior fusion approach are suitable for unstable lumbar compression burst fractures. We believe that 2 factors contributed to the success of screw fixation using the USS Schanz screw. First, the structure and load transmission of the Schanz screw system (USS) have greater similarity to those of the lumbar posterior column compared with that of conventional pedicle screw system. The load of lumbar posterior column was not transmitted directly from the superior to inferior articular process (similar to butterfly-shaped conduction). The load of the Schanz screws is also not directly transmitted from the superior screw to the inferior screw (similar to “][”-shaped conduction) but from the superior screw to the connectors to the rods to the connectors to the inferior screw. In contrast, the load of conventional pedicle screws is transmitted directly from the superior screw to the inferior screw (similar to “| |”-shaped conduction). The conventional pedicle system has been effective in treating burst fractures with an LSC score of <6. Parker et al. USS connecting rods could function similarly to the supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, and ligamentum flavum of the PLC. These rods would become very important once the PLC has been damaged, because the PLC is an important stabilizing structure of the spine, especially for flexion. Using the 0°–18° adjustable function between the connecting clamp and Schanz screw, we were able to easily adjust the insert angle without bending the rods to match the angle of the screw inserted obliquely. In the present study, we implanted the Schanz screws in an oblique downward direction into the vertebrae above and below the injured vertebrae using an insertion depth of 90%–100%. All 22 patients in the present study achieved restoration of >90% height of the anterior border of the injured vertebra and no postoperative correction loss occurred. The mean insertion slope angle of the superior and inferior screws adjacent to the injured vertebrae was 7.45° ± 3.08° and 10.25° ± 3.80°, respectively. We believe that the obliquely downward screw insertion has several advantages compared with conventional screw insertion, in parallel with its superior endplate, including that during the process of distraction of the posterior column, oblique downward insertion of the screw in our technique can distract the posterior column upward and forward. However, for conventional screw insertion parallel to the endplates, the posterior column can only be distracted upward. During distraction of the anterior column, distraction of the superior screw was first conducted forward and upward and, subsequently, upward and backward once crossing the superior endplate. Compared with the conventional parallel insertion of the screw, oblique and downward insertion of the screw resulted in better reduction of the downward and backward retrodisplaced vertebra. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to report the advantages of oblique and downward screw insertion, and, thus, further studies are warranted to confirm our findings. Although short-segment posterior instrumentation with additional screws at the fracture level has achieved success in the treatment of unstable thoracolumbar burst fractures, screws paralleling the endplates have seldom achieved >90% restoration of anterior border height of the injured vertebra. Pellise et al. In the present study, the mean percentage of canal compromise was reduced from 51.82% ± 12.80% preoperatively to 11.86% ± 6.34% postoperatively and 10.50% ± 5.73% at the final follow-up visit. In the present study, we found no obvious loss of correction with regard to the SIEA after implant removal. This could have resulted from a series of protective strategies we have adopted in our procedures including preservation of the facet joint and its capsule, the PLC, and without transverse incision of paravetebral muscles. During our procedure, we did not expose the lateral border of the laminae or facet joint of the injured vertebra, and we do not dissect the facet joint capsule of the instrumented vertebra before screw insertion. The T12 transverse process was not removed in patients with L1 fractures, maximally protecting the intact T12 transverse process. Another factor contributing to the success of our technique is the use of postoperative bracing for ≥3 months. No consensus has yet been reached regarding the use of postoperative bracing. Although our technique had good clinical effects for unstable thoracolumbar burst fractures, we do not disagree with the effectiveness of routine 6-screw construct that includes the fractured vertebra. Our technique could be an alternative for fractures with a severe comminuted pedicle in which it is impossible to implant the screw. Short-segment Schanz screw fixation implanted in an oblique downward direction seems to be a promising method for lumbar burst fractures with an incomplete neurological deficit because it provided good clinical and radiographic outcomes.