The pulsed disc and doughnut column (PDDC) is a widely used type of liquid–liquid extraction equipment. Both the research and design of this type of equipment require in-depth knowledge of the dispersed phase droplet size distribution (DSD). The coupling of computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and population balance model (PBM) has exhibited a significant potential for predicting the DSD by considering droplet breakage and coalescence. In the present work, the CFD–PBM simulation is adopted to predict the DSD, and to investigate local liquid–liquid flow behaviors in a square-sectioned PDDC. The empirical correlations of the breakup kernels, which are based on our previous work [Hao Zhou et al., Direct measurement of droplet breakage in a pulsed disc and doughnut column. AIChE Journal, 2017, 63(9), 4188–4200], are implemented in the CFD code. For comparison, the kernel functions obtained by Coulaloglou and Tavlarides [Coulaloglou and Tavlarides. Description of interaction processes in agitated liquid–liquid dispersions. Chemical Engineering Science, 1977, 32, 1289–1297] are also tested. The class method with the fixed pivot technique is utilized to solve the population balance equations. The droplet size distribution predicted by the CFD–PBM simulation combined with the kernel functions that we have previously determined experimentally are observed to be more precise than those of Coulaloglou and Tavlarides. Accordingly, the CFD–PBM simulation results with the kernel functions of our proposed correlations are used to investigate the liquid–liquid flow behaviors in the PDDC. The influences of droplet size range and initial droplet size distribution at the dispersed phase inlet in the predicted DSD are discussed. The hydraulic performance of simulation results agrees well with experimental data. Local flow behaviors are illustrated to depict the typical flow characteristics of PDDC. The simulation results suggest that CFD–PBM method with the proposed PBM kernel functions is a promising approach for the simulation of liquid–liquid flow in the PDDC.pulsation amplitude, m pulsation intensity, m s birth rate of droplets for breakage in internal droplet breakup frequency function in internal drag coefficient size of the column square-section, m aperture of square doughnut plates size of square disc plate death rate of droplets for breakage in internal mean droplet Sauter diameter, m droplet diameter, m lower and upper diameter boundaries for diameter of mother droplet, m critical diameter of mother droplet, m pivot droplet diameter at subrange ( Eotvos number inter-phase momentum exchanges, kg m drag force, kg m pulsation frequency, s acceleration of gravity, m s column height, m height between successive plates, m daughter droplet size distribution factor number of droplets in size range ( number density function droplets in internal pressure, Pa cumulative volume droplet size distribution dispersed phase flow rate, mL min Reynolds number PBM source term in internal time, s average velocity, m s pulsation velocity, m s volume fraction daughter droplet size distribution function in internal turbulent energy dissipation rate, m dispersed phase holdup density, kg m interfacial tension, N m Stress–strain tensor, kg m viscosity, Pa·s class method computational fluid dynamics droplet size distribution population balance model pulsed disc and doughnut column quadrature method of moments direct quadrature method of moments The liquid–liquid two-phase flow is a commonly found chemical engineering system where one liquid phase is dispersed as droplets in another phase to enhance mixing. As a typical example of liquid–liquid flow, solvent extraction, has been used in hydrometallurgy, environmental engineering, and nuclear fuel reprocessing fields ( The knowledge of droplet size in the liquid–liquid extraction process aids in the research and design of PDDC as well as in generating conclusions pertaining to the hydrodynamic and mass transfer performance of liquid–liquid flow ( In the PDDC, because of the periodic pulsation input, dispersed phase droplets undergo intense deformation, breakage, and coalescence during one pulsation cycle ( However, it is evident that a global and constant droplet diameter is insufficient to represent the liquid–liquid flow behaviors realistically; the droplet diameter varies spatially and temporally. To improve the accuracy of CFD simulations, a variable droplet size should be adopted. In this regard, population balance model (PBM) implemented through the CFD–PBM coupling method, provides an opportunity to achieve such an accuracy ( The application of CFD–PBM method to predict the droplet size distribution depends on the kernel functions to describe droplet breakage and coalescence events. Several breakup ( Precise kernel functions must be determined before a CFD–PBM simulation to be performed; otherwise results will be unreliable. In view of the lack of suitable PBM kernel functions in the PDDC, experimental correlations of droplet breakage kernel functions were proposed in our previous work ( This paper is organized as follows: in For the simulation of liquid–liquid two-phase flow in pulsed columns, the Euler–Euler method is widely used. Under the Euler–Euler framework, each phase is assumed as a continuous medium; it is identified by introducing the concept of local volume fraction, In two-phase flow, the interfacial force, The population balance equation coupled with the CFD to describe the change in droplet size distribution is a transport equation of the number density function The kernel functions involved in droplet breakage events are droplet breakage frequency function, As illustrated in our previous work ( Accordingly, the daughter size distribution can be expressed as follows: This gives the daughter size distribution function For the kernel functions of Zhou, For the kernel functions of C&T, The C&T model contains two adjustable parameters, which depend on the physical properties and types of equipment used. These two adjustable parameters, It is observed in For the daughter droplet size distribution function, the Zhou’s model considers both the droplet sizes and local hydrodynamic parameters. The turbulent energy dissipation rate, The geometry of the simulation domain is the same as that used in our previous work ( The single-phase flow simulation results indicate that the flow field in the PDDC is symmetric ( The calculation domain is depicted in It should be emphasized that the discretization of population balance equations in the volume coordinate is generally reported in literature. Because a droplet size distribution based on the diameter coordinate is more intuitive and make it easier to couple the CFD and PBM, discretization of population balance equations in diameter coordinate is adopted in this work. Theoretically, these two discretization methods are identical in terms of solving the population balance equations. Eq. The number density function, Thereafter, the transport equation of the number density function, If the daughter size distribution function, The coupling of PBM with the CFD is based on the Euler–Euler framework. A local droplet diameter is required to solve the interfacial momentum transfer terms of governing equations. The local Sauter mean diameter In the CFD–PBM method, the droplet diameter is not global or constant; instead, it depends on time and location. In particular, if droplets with different sizes belong to different velocity groups, then this case is that of a complex multi-phase flow. Hence, it would be intolerable to solve the numerous governing equations of a multi-phase flow simulation. The CFD–PBM simulation could be regarded as a compromise to balance the numerical accuracy of the Euler–Euler two-phase method and the computational cost of the multi-fluid flow method. The general hydraulic parameters in kernel functions, such as turbulent energy dissipation rate, A reasonable droplet size range for every operation condition is estimated according to experimental results. If the droplet size range is divided into five subranges, it is found that this discretization is unable to provide sufficient information that pertains to the droplet size distribution; however, the use of 15 subranges significantly increases computational load. Accordingly, the division of the droplet size range into 10 equal subranges is applied. In all, five operation conditions are simulated; these are identical to those presented in our previous experimental study. The simulation conditions and discretization parameters are listed in The subrange interval, Δ It can be noted that the pivotal diameters are equally spaced at the droplet diameter coordinate. The droplet size range is not fixed; it is adjusted according to the operation conditions. However, this is different from the findings of The boundary conditions are properly set as shown in Ten variables, Transient-state simulation is performed by the commercial CFD code Ansys CFX 16.1. The standard The simulation results obtained with the two sets of PBM kernel functions are compared with the experimental results in relation to cumulative volume droplet size distribution, The experimental results shown in The model of Zhou captures significant details of the droplet size distribution; consequently, it generally exhibits better agreements with experimental and simulation results. However, Two other problems are investigated in the present work by means of the CFD–PBM simulation method implemented with the droplet breakage kernel functions of Zhou. One pertains to the influence of droplet size range, as mentioned in Using the method discussed in In can be noted in The foregoing suggests that even the appropriate droplet size ranges have no remarkable influence on steady simulation results. Nevertheless, it is not advisable to use a universal size range for all operation conditions. A coarse droplet size for each condition should be estimated in advance to ensure better simulation results. All of the foregoing cases assume that only droplets with a maximum diameter are present at the dispersed phase inlet, as illustrated in It can be noted that with two different initial droplet size distributions at the dispersed phase inlet, the simulation results only have few differences and agree well with experimental data. This suggests that with a reasonable initial droplet size distribution at the dispersed phase inlet, different distribution models have negligible impacts on the steady droplet size distribution. Here, a reasonable size distribution means the larger the droplet diameter, the higher the proportion. If there are considerably numerous small-size droplets at the dispersed phase inlet, or more extremely, no large-size droplets, the CFD–PBM simulation cannot yield the correct droplet size distribution. The hydraulic performance of the PDDC in this section refers to the dispersed phase holdup and the global droplet mean diameter, The holdup decreases with increasing pulsation intensity because the flow rate was controlled to maintain a good observation condition in the experiments. Both experiment and simulation results predict the global Sauter mean diameter, The simulation results of holdup and mean diameter with Zhou’s model fit better with experimental data than that of C&T model. This corroborates that Zhou’s model is appropriate to the CFD–PBM simulation in the PDDC. However, based on the holdup and Sauter mean diameter The turbulent energy dissipation rate, The hydraulic performance presented in The typical flow field in the PDDC based on the simulation results are shown in At the positive apex moment of the sinusoidal pulsation period ( It can be noted in     In this work, the correlations of the PBM kernel functions obtained from our previous work ( The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. We gratefully acknowledge the support of the