The processability of four oil sand ores was evaluated through batch flotation experiments under different conditions of pH and temperature. The data of bitumen recovery were accurately modeled using a first-order kinetic equation assuming that the total amount of bitumen in the system consisted of two bitumen components, i.e., a fully-liberated bitumen fraction, f, characterized by a high flotation rate constant (kf
                     ), and poorly-liberated bitumen fraction, s, of a low flotation rate constant (ks
                     ) so that f
                     +
                     s
                     =1. The role of humic acids naturally present in the ores was basically that of a depressant of bitumen since poor ores contained the highest proportion of humic acids per gram of bitumen. The recovery of bitumen from oil sand ores correlated very well with the absorbance at 520nm of the alkali extracts produced from the ores. High bitumen recovery was achieved for ores characterized by a low absorbance value of the extract, while low bitumen recoveries were obtained for ores producing a high absorbance value in the alkali extraction test.
                  Power draw measurements ahead of the bitumen flotation/extraction stage showed that power drawn by slurries of poor processing ores was not affected by pH and temperature, which was attributed to the low amount of bitumen and low degree of bitumen liberation in these ores. In contrast, good ores required more power for mixing under conditions of low pH and low temperature than under conditions of high pH and high temperature. Gradual bitumen liberation at higher temperature and pH improved the dispersion of the slurries and led to lower power requirements for mixing. Additionally, extraction data indicated that bitumen recovery was proportional to the power draw measured during feed conditioning. Poor ores produced slurries of lower viscosities than slurries prepared from good ores. As a result, higher power consumption was required during conditioning of good ores to promote bitumen liberation and to increase bitumen recovery.
                  Overall, it is possible to assess the processability of oil sand ores by quantifying the occurrence of humic acids in the ores, and to correlate ore processability with the rheology of ore slurries. Although poor ores are characterized by lower viscosities and lower power requirements during mixing, the presence of humic acids in these ores and their depressing action also contribute to lower bitumen recoveries.Oil sand ores are composed of bitumen, water, and sand with a typical composition for the Athabasca deposits in Alberta of 4–14  In general, studies on the effect of rheology on bitumen extraction are very scarce, and the role of humic acids in the rheological behavior of oil sand slurries and in bitumen extraction has not been systematically investigated. In Part I of this contribution, it was demonstrated that the alkali extraction test originally developed to determine the oxidation of bituminous metallurgical coals can also be used to measure the amount of humic acids in oil sand ores. The absorbance of alkali extracts at 520 In this Part II of the publication, changes in the viscosity of oil sands slurries due to changes in pH, temperature, and ore quality were studied using power draw measurements. Additionally, power draw measurements were correlated with the bitumen extraction results from the same oil sand ores. Finally, a correlation was determined between bitumen recovery, power draw measurements, and humic acids concentrations in the oil sand samples. Four oil sand ores of varying quality were supplied by Canadian Natural Resources Ltd. Ores 2, 3, 5, and 7 – the same ores as in Part I – were used in these studies, and their characterization was given in Sodium chloride (NaCl) was used to prepare background solutions while a 1 The process of bitumen extraction in oil sands processing is in general carried out at solids concentrations around 30 to 45 Where, Bitumen extractability was assessed through batch flotation experiments in a standard Denver flotation machine using the same 2.7  The second aspect that had to be carefully considered for good reproducibility was a proper control of pH. Sodium hydroxide reacts with the sand as well as with the bitumen component of the ores. The products of these chemical reactions are It has to be noted that all the power draw measurements that will be presented in this paper were done in duplicates with levels of reproducibility similar to those presented in   As far as the effect of pH is concerned, it can be seen from  The flotation rate of bitumen can be modeled using first-order kinetics as given by Eq. Then, the bitumen recovery Modeling of the experimental data from bitumen flotation can be supported by experimental observations regarding the way in which bitumen is liberated and floated during this process. Flotation experiments were done using feed slurries that were conditioned for 25 Combining Eqs. As can be seen, Eq. Reproducibility of the flotation experiments was assessed by testing in duplicates two ores of different processability, i.e., ores 2 and 5, under different conditions of pH and temperature, i.e., pH It can be seen that the reproducibility of these experiments was very good with a maximum relative error of around 9%. In order to achieve this level of reproducibility, temperature adjustment, conditioning time, control of pH, and homogeneity of the feed had to be consistently maintained in all tests.  Analysis of the effects of pH and temperature on bitumen recovery reveals some interesting features. It is observed that the effects of both pH and temperature on bitumen extraction from ore 2 are of relatively similar magnitude, both parameters are equally important in affecting the recovery of bitumen. In contrast, for ores 3 and 5 the effect of temperature is significantly larger than the effect of pH. It is known that the hydrophobicity of fines in oil sands ores is higher for ores of low bitumen and high fines contents ( Flotation data for ore 7 show that pH and temperature do not affect bitumen extraction from this poor ore. This result agrees with the results from power draw measurements that showed no effect of these two variables on the power draw of slurries of ore 7, which suggests the existence of a correlation between extractability of bitumen and rheology of ore slurries. It can be seen that bitumen recovery increases as energy consumption during feed conditioning decreases (ores 2, 3, and 5). This correlation can be explained by the fact that both pH and temperature improve bitumen liberation from the sand grains ( It is interesting to note that the data in Changes in bitumen liberation resulting from changes in pH and temperature can also be followed from the variation of the parameter   The results in  Humic acids due to their complex and heterogeneous nature are capable of interacting with a large variety of materials including clays and other minerals ( It was shown in Part I of this paper that if amounts of ores of different bitumen and fines contents containing 1 As the TOC results and mass balance calculations suggest, if a larger mass of an ore is used in the alkali extraction test, the TOC and humic acids concentrations should also increase proportionally. However, this increase in TOC values per mass of ore should be larger for a low-bitumen ore than for a high bitumen ore. In order to experimentally verify these observations, alkali extraction tests were performed on each of the eight ores. In these tests, three different masses of each ore were tested, i.e., 5.5, 10.0, and 33.3  The first important observation from Another way to analyze these results is through the determination of the areas under the curves, as presented in The proposed experimental procedure for assessing the extractability of an unknown ore simply involves subjecting 2–3 samples of different masses of the same ore (between about 5 and 34 Based on this test, it is also possible to classify different types of ores by comparing the curves generated from the values of TOC and Abs520. The analysis of the data obtained from the tests on the eight ore samples used in this work indicates that good ores (low fines, high bitumen, such as ore 1) should produce areas under the TOC-Abs520 curves lower than 20 Power draw measurements during mixing of oil sand suspensions showed that in all cases, the power draw abruptly increased during the first 1–2 The recovery of bitumen from oil sand ores correlated very well with the parameter Abs520 of the alkali extracts produced from the ores. High bitumen recovery was achieved for ores characterized by a low absorbance value of the extract, while low bitumen recoveries were obtained for ores producing a high absorbance value in the alkali extraction test. Since Abs520 is a measure of the amount of humic acids leached from the ores, the results suggested that the presence of humic acids in the ores was a very significant factor in bitumen extraction. The presence of high amounts of humic acids in oil sands ores led to low bitumen recoveries and the action of humic acids was basically that of a depressant. In combination with the total organic carbon content in the extracts, Abs520 can be used for predicting the processability of a given ore. The recovery of bitumen during the extraction process can readily be modeled using first-order kinetics equations and assuming that the total amount of bitumen in the system can be represented by two bitumen components, i.e., a fully-liberated bitumen fraction, This study was made possible through the financial assistance provided by a collaborative research and development grant from the Natural