Herein, an environmentally friendly and selective leaching process of Cd, from spent Ni-Cd battery, is reported by the use of alkaline glycine solution. The pertinent parameters affecting Cd leaching levels, including the concentration of glycine (0.5–1.5 mol/L), pH (8–11), temperature (25–75 °C), and time (30–150 min) were statistically investigated via response surface methodology coupled with central composite design. The results showed that the level of Ni in the leaching solution is negligible, especially at the leaching time shorter than 150 min, while Cd leaching percentage can reach higher than 80%, confirming the selectivity of the process. In addition, glycine concentration and time are the most significant parameters, and for achieving a Cd leaching percentage higher than 80%, the level of glycine should be at least 1 mol/L. It was attempted to understand the statistically significant interactions among the factors affecting the Cd leaching process based on a comprehensive thermodynamic discussion. Finally, Cd was successfully precipitated in the form of CdS nanoparticles (~20 nm) by the addition of Na2S solution into the obtained leaching solution.With ceaseless exploitation of primary metallic resources, the use of electronic wastes, such as spent batteries, becomes vital for the fulfillment of the current demand There is a relatively extensive literature on the leaching process of Cd and Ni from spent Ni-Cd batteries The various types of chemicals used as the leaching agents for the spent Ni-Cd batteries typically shows a similar leaching behavior; i.e., not only the leaching percentage of Cd is similar to that of Ni, but also the release of other unwanted species (specifically Fe) into the leaching solution is inevitable. This can partly be explained by the high acid power of inorganic acids such as sulfuric and hydrochloric acids, and to some extent by the close physicochemical properties of many transition metals including Cd and Ni Glycine (H To the authors’ best knowledge, glycine was applied in only one case for the leaching of Cd Another interesting point regarding the use of glycine (at the leaching step) is that this simple amino acid can also act as a surfactant The present work aims to evaluate the leaching behavior of spent Ni-Cd batteries by the use of the alkaline glycine solution. The effect of important physicochemical parameters – i.e., the glycine concentration, pH, temperature and time – in a spent Ni-Cd battery leaching process were identified and quantified by using response surface methodology (RSM) based on a central composite design (CCD) The spent Ni-Cd battery was obtained from the Islamic Republic of Iran Railways (IRIR). The spent batteries were dismantled manually, and the cell components were collected. Before the characterization and leaching, the sample was thoroughly mixed to avoid heterogeneity. The elemental and phase analyses of the spent Ni-Cd battery powder was carried out by using Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES), (Optima 7300DV, Perkin Elmer), and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD), (PANanalytical X'pert pro MPD powder diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation), respectively. The sample contained 14.9% cadmium, 17.4% nickel, 7.1% iron, 5.62% potassium, and small quantities of cobalt, and copper. XRD analysis showed that the Cd, Ni, and Fe were present in the form of Cd(OH) Glycine (Gly, NH All experimental runs were conducted in 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mL leaching solution by the use of a rotary shaker at 210 RPM at different temperatures (25–75 °C). The solid to liquid ratio in all the experiments was set at 10% (10 g of sample to 100 mL of solution). All experiments were carried out in duplicate. In order to precipitate Cd in the form of CdS under ambient conditions, 100 mL of Na A central composite design (CCD) was selected, and twenty-eight experimental runs were generated with 4 factors and 3 levels by the principle of RSM using MINITAB Release 19. The levels employed for the different factors, according to CCD design, are listed in The quadratic polynomial regression model (Eq. The concentrations of cadmium, nickel, and iron were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES). In order to calculate the cadmium leaching percentage (Cd leaching %) and the cadmium precipitation percentage (Cd precipitation %), the following formulae were employed: The elemental and phase analyses of the precipitated CdS powder was carried out by using energy dispersive Spectrometry (EDS, INACTA-ACT, Oxford International), and X-Ray Diffraction (XRD), (PANanalytical X'pert pro MPD powder diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation), respectively. Furthermore, the size and morphology of the precipitated CdS powder were studied by the Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM, Tescan Mira 3, Czech). Besides, the functional groups of the obtained CdS were evaluated by Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) with a Unicam FT-IR Spectrometer (Mattson 1000 model).  According to the results presented in According to the main effect plots (not shown), by increasing the level of these factors up to a specific value, the Cd leaching percentage enhances while further increase in the level of these factors results in a decrease in the response. Moreover, at a 10% significance level (P-value of 0.1), there are significant interactions between [Gly] with both the pH and t; besides, the interactions between T with both the pH and t are statistically significant. This reveals that the optimum value of [Gly] and T in the cadmium leaching process are influenced by both the values of pH and t. By pulling out the statistically insignificant terms (the terms with a P-value > 0.1), a polynomial model was proposed as (R It should be pointed out that the level of all factors ([Gly], pH, t, and T) can be varied within −1 to +1 range in Eq. According to the ANOVA table ( Surface plots were employed to acquire more information about the effect of a factor on the response when there are statistically significant interactions amongst the factors. Based on the surface plots presented in In order to compare the significance of interactive terms on the Cd leaching percentage, the polynomial regression equation developed in coded values (Eq. It should be pointed out that the contour plots corresponding to pH × T and T × t interactive terms contain the high cadmium leaching percentages (higher than 80%) only when other factors are set at their middle values; i.e. [Gly] = 1 mol/L and t = 90 min in the pH – T contour plot ( The contour plot presented in According to the results presented in The levels of the four factors (namely glycine concentration, pH, temperature, and time) for achieving the maximum Cd leaching from Ni-Cd spent battery (at the solid to liquid ratio of 10%) were optimized by using the proposed second-order polynomial model (Eq. In order to precipitate Cd in the form of CdS, the leaching solution obtained under optimum conditions ([Gly] = ~1.2 mol/L, pH = ~9.6, T = 25 °C and t = 150 min), was kept in contact with Na According to the XRD pattern of the obtained CdS powder ( Finally, the FESEM micrograph of the precipitated CdS ( As previously mentioned in In the alkaline aqueous solutions and the absence of complexing ligands, Cd(OH) By using the equilibrium constants of Cd On the other hand, glycine as a strong complexing agent for Cd can facilitate the dissolution of Cd in the aqueous solutions. Specifically, in alkaline aqueous solutions (8 < pH < 11), glycine dissociates according to Eq. In the presence of glycinate anion (Gly Regarding the large equilibrium constants of Eqs. The overall possible reactions between the Cd(OH) By considering the reactions (Eqs. The effect of temperature on the solubility can be clarified by taking into account the Cd(OH) Regarding the hydrolysis reaction of Na Both the glycine zwitterion and glycinate anion are the products of these two reactions. It is worth mentioning that the amino and carboxyl groups present in the structure of glycine can attach to the CdS surface A novel and eco-friendly process for the recovery of Cd, from spent Ni-Cd battery, in the form of CdS nanoparticles was proposed. Response surface methodology, coupled with the central composite design was employed to determine the optimum levels of parameters ([Gly], T, pH, and t) for achieving the maximum Cd leaching percentage. The results of statistical modeling showed that the interactions between [Gly] × pH, [Gly] × t, pH × T, and T × t were significant. Also, at the optimum levels of parameters, namely [Gly] = 1.2 M, pH = 9.6, t = 150 min and 25 = °C, more than 86% of the Cd could be selectively leached, while the Ni essentially remained in the solid residue. The thermodynamic study on the reaction between Cd(OH)  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: