Direct flotation of valleriite-containing cupriferous ores is characterized by recovery of only around 60% of the copper and nickel. Valleriite leaching using aqueous SO2 at 90–95 °C resulted in the formation of sulphides of the non-ferrous metals. The leaching also resulted in a significant upgrading of the copper and nickel from 5.5% in the ore to 9.8% in the solid product due to dissolution of Fe, Mg and Al. Flotation of the sulphide from this residue gave >90% recovery of the non-ferrous metals into the concentrate. Additionally, passing the ore through a disintegrator prior to leaching enhanced the leaching rates.Valleriite (Val) This investigation examines the transformation of valleriite to sulphides by reaction with aqueous sulphur dioxide solution at up to 100 °C. At Norilsk, sulphur dioxide is considered a waste product and therefore readily available at minimal cost. Its use as a reagent will also decrease atmospheric emissions. In parallel, the effect of a low power consumption ( The chemical and mineralogical composition of VCO from the Talnakh deposit, Eastern Siberia, Russia) is presented in The investigations were carried out using two samples prepared by different techniques. Sample 1 was obtained by screening the < The kinetics of VCO interaction with SO Ten grams of ore were loaded into the reaction vessel which was then evacuated using a vacuum pump ( Ore samples and solution aliquots were treated using aqua regia followed by a removal of the nitric acid by evaporation. The resultant solutions were made up using 3 M HCl. Colorimetry was used to determine Si (ammonium molybdate method), Al (aluminon), Fe (dipyridyl), Ni (dimethylglyoxime) and Co using nitro–R–salt. Atomic adsorption spectrophotometry was used for Fe, Ni, Cu, Ca, Mg and Mn. Iodometric titrations were used for SO After one pass of the initial VCO sample through the disintegrator, the particle size range was 8–42 µm, with 60% < The relative ratios of the valleriite and serpentine XRD peaks changed as the number of passes through the disintegrator increased ( Although aqueous solutions of sulphur dioxide are inherently unstable due to disproportionation the reactions are very slow at temperatures from ambient to 100–120 °C (  A rapid reaction between sulphur dioxide and calcite (7.6%, The increase in pressure is due to the much lower solubility of CO At the same time sulphur dioxide is also likely to react with the sulphide sulphur in the valleriite and pyrrhotite forming nonvolatile forms of sulphur. This reaction would predominate once all calcite had been consumed. When stage 3 comes to an end ( Contents of the main elements in the solid phase and solution after sample 2 was reacted with 6.2 g SO XRD of the solid residue indicated dominant serpentine, gypsum CаSO XRD of the flotation concentrate after sulphur removal showed peaks for covellite CuS and pyrite FeS The reaction of pyrrhotite and sulphur dioxide in aqueous solutions results in formation of elementary sulphur ( The reaction of SO In the presence of sulphate calcium precipitates as gypsum CаSO Thus, valleriite conversion in SO Flotation of VCO was examined before and after sulphidation of the sample prepared by one pass through the disintegrator. A laboratory float machine 237F-A (chamber volume 0.5 L) was employed. The flotation reagent regime was: float reagent–butyl xanthogenate (100 g/t), frother–T-66 (30 g/t) or 10 min.  The Cu, Ni and Co in the sulphide concentrate were 8.65, 3.1 and 0.058%, respectively. The total sulphur in this product was 51.7%. Elemental sulphur was extracted out of this concentrate using CCl A valleriite-containing serpentine ore was sulphided using aqueous sulphur dioxide at 90–95 °C. This process leads to selective sulphidation of the copper, nickel and cobalt and dissolution of iron, magnesium and some aluminium. Flotation of the as-received ore was ineffective with less than 50% recovery of Cu, Ni and Co, after sulphidation the recoveries were > We are grateful to Nicholas J. Welham for his constructive comments and editorial work. This research was supported by the Russian Foundation of Branch Research (RFBR) under Project Numbers 06-05-64177, the Integration Grant of SB RAS under Project Number 11, “Norilsk-nickel” Company under Project Number 33-04-HH/1033-2004.