Fracture models of vein formation can produce realistic training images (TIs) for use in multiple-point geostatistics. Vein formation is modeled by applying flow simulation to a fracture model to mimic the flow of an ore-bearing fluid through fractured rock. TIs are generated by assuming that veins form in areas of high flow where there would be preferential deposition of the mineral of interest. We propose a methodology to simulate mineralized veins by constructing a fracture model within the deposit, modeling the permeability and simulating the flow of ore-bearing fluids. The veins are defined by considering the areas of high flow. The methodology is implemented with a fracture model of the Whiteshell area in Manitoba. To assess the reasonableness of the TIs, comparisons are made to geological models of gold deposits in Quebec and Nova Scotia that display similar geometric characteristics such as braiding, thickening and thinning. A FORTRAN program TIGEN, based on GSLIB program formats is included and can be used to generate TIs from fracture models.GRADE ESTIMATION often requires a prior geological model that defines the extension, shape and distribution of geological units. These units are characterized by a particular lithology, alteration and mineralogy that determine the behavior of the processed ore extracted by a mining method. Furthermore, the spatial continuity of ore grade changes from one unit to another. Therefore, constructing the geological model is key for the good performance of any numerical model of the grades within an ore deposit. Several approaches exist to create the geological model. Deterministic modeling is the most common approach ( The problem facing the mining industry is that there are currently no TIs of geological units readily available for a practical application of MPS. There are TIs appropriate for fluvial and deepwater oil reservoirs ( A practical solution to this problem is to create computer programs that can generate TIs given specific information about the deposit of interest. We propose a methodology to model the formation process of vein deposits. We do not extend our scope beyond vein deposits in this paper; however, we anticipate that similar consideration of depositional processes could be used to generate TIs for other types of mineral deposits. Our methodology to model the geological formation of veins begins with a fracture model that is representative of the deposit of interest. These models can be obtained from a variety of sources and require knowledge of fracture spacing, orientation, prevalence and density. If this type of information is known about the deposit, then the proposed methodology can be implemented by the practitioner to generate a realistic TI for use in multiple-point geostatistics. MPS-based techniques can then be used to carry the structure seen in the TI into the model ( First, a brief overview of the geological formation of veins will give the reader the necessary background to judge the effectiveness of the TI in mimicking this type of formation and the usefulness of the TIs. A description of each step in the TI generation process is then followed by a visual comparison of the TIs to geological interpretations of vein-type deposits. This paper proposes a methodology for creating TIs for vein-type mineral deposits by modeling the geological formation of veins. Therefore, conceptual understanding of the formation of veins is necessary. Specifically, the type of ore-bearing fluid, its movement through fractured rock and the deposition of a mineral of interest from the fluid must be appreciated so that we can mimic the expected structures. The nature of the ore-bearing fluid will greatly affect the type of ore deposit formed. Each ore-bearing fluid has its own unique properties: silicate-dominated magmas; water-dominated hydrothermal fluids; meteoric waters; seawater; connate waters; and fluids associated with metamorphic processes. The ore-bearing fluid travels through the host rock obeying physical laws dictated by the fluids viscosity and density, the host rocks permeability, interconnected pores, fractures, faults and the natural pressure gradients due to in situ stresses ( The movement of a fluid through rock is determined by the permeability of the host rock. Permeability is influenced by a number of factors such as porosity, interconnected pore spaces, fractures/faults and folds. Veins are created when the path of highest permeability through a rock is highly influenced by fracturing and faulting rather than by rock properties such as porosity and interconnected pore spaces. When this occurs, the fluid will preferentially flow though the faults and deposit minerals in vein-type structures. Different types of faulting and folding are shown in TIs to be used in multiple-point geostatistics will be created by mimicking the vein formation process described above. The basis for this proposed methodology lies in the availability of a fracture model. There are several ways to create a fracture model. Stochastic simulation has been used to create fracture models ( One idea would be to use the fracture models directly as a TI, bypassing many of the steps in the proposed methodology; however, there are a number of undesirable features present in fracture models that make it desirable to use them as input to flow modeling first. In order to generate a realistic TI, the movement of the ore-bearing fluid through the fractured host rock will be modeled by applying a flow simulation to a fracture model. The TIs will be created by associating areas of high flow with vein locations. Specifically, the methodology for generating TIs for vein deposits consists of generating a fracture model; modeling the permeability of all areas in the model; running a flow simulation on the permeability model; and creating a TI by considering veins to be areas of high flow. A detailed explanation and rationale for each step follows. Fracture models can be obtained from: (1) programs that seed fractures and then propagate them according to known stress regimes; (2) programs that draw fracture characteristics from a distribution and place these objects randomly in a model; or (3) models of areas where the fractures and faults have been extensively mapped. The fracture model is extremely important for the generation of a TI as it has a large influence on the features present in the final TI. The following should be considered when generating the initial fracture model:      A realistic TI depends on the choice of an appropriate fracture model and should consider the features mentioned above. The fracture model of a specific deposit must be inferred from site-specific observations and other similar deposits. In order to run a finite-difference flow simulation on a fracture model, the permeability of the area must be established. Permeability can vary by depth, rock type, fracture type/orientation, etc. Unlike permeability modeling in the petroleum industry, which commonly depends on a stochastic approach conditioned to available well logs, core plugs and/or seismic data, this particular application requires a permeability model in the In the example presented in the next section, it is assumed that the area of interest is characterized by a binary mixture of fractured and non-fractured rock at an arbitrary grid resolution. The permeability of the fractures is uniform, but higher than the permeability of the surrounding host rock. Refinement of the TI and a sensitivity analysis of the resulting images to different flow thresholds (and hence permeability regimes) are considered in a latter section. This assumption of a binary permeability field is simplistic; however, it will serve to demonstrate the methodology. Within the available code there is the ability to consider heterogeneous permeability as well as variations in A steady-state flow simulation is then run on the permeability model to calculate the pressures in each block. The flow simulator used in the example is FLOWSIM ( This flow simulation generates the pressure in each block of the fracture model. From the pressure difference between blocks, the flow into and out of each block can be calculated from Darcy's law: The calculation of the total flow rate through a single block in the model is the sum of the flow through each face of the block. The net flow rate in a block will be zero because of conservation of mass; therefore, the absolute flow rate from each block into (or out of) the block is summed to obtain the flow through the block. This results in a flow rate that is actually twice the flow rate through the block because the absolute flow rate is used. The relative magnitudes of twice the flow rate will still give an accurate picture of where the veins are located, so this Since FLOWSIM only considers flow in the direction of the pressure gradient, multiple flow simulations considering flow in all three principal directions should be considered. The absolute flow rate for a block is calculated for each pressure gradient (see The final step is to apply a threshold cutoff to the flow rates. Veins are identified by blocks that have a high flow rate. This threshold can be adjusted depending on the desired vein structure. The highest flow rates are located in the blocks that contain fractures with the flow rate gradually decreasing in nearby blocks. Narrow veins can be generated by applying a relatively high threshold on the flow rate. If this threshold is decreased, additional blocks will fall above the threshold, thus generating a thicker vein structure. The proposed methodology is applied to a section of The fracture models used for this paper were generated by A flow simulation of the permeability model is run using FLOWSIM ( The flow rates for both the Many of the anomalies seen near the fault boundaries in The images in The distance the vein extends into the rock matrix can be controlled using either the aspect ratio or the threshold cutoff; increasing the aspect ratio or the cutoff will restrict the veins expansion into the rock matrix. This allows the user to create different TIs based on the geology of the veins being modeled. In general, the TIs seem to connect unconnected faults in a logical manner. The faults in the fracture model are connected to nearby faults using the path of least resistance due to the nature of the flow simulation; some locations where this occurs are highlighted in As mentioned previously, the disjointed nature of the fracture model is not seen in the TI generated using a flow simulation, making the TI appear more realistic. To better assess the realism of these images, they are compared with geological interpretations of actual vein deposits. Similar features can also be seen in the TI and the Louvicourt Goldfield deposit shown in It should be noted that there is a significant difference in scale between the fracture model used and the deposits shown in It should be highlighted that the criteria for validating these TIs are subjective, since the TIs will be considered as a good model of the lithofacies of the deposit if they are similar to the interpretation the geologist generates based on expert knowledge and the information gathered through several sampling and logging campaigns. The actual geological architecture may differ from this interpretation, and so will the TIs. TIs can be conditioned to hard and soft data subsequently using a multiple-point simulation method, providing a model for the geology that can account for the uncertainty of the interpretation. TIs should be considered only if they make sense from a geological viewpoint. The methodology proposed aims at providing a way to materialize the geological knowledge into a numerical model. The realism of the TIs must be assessed by experts in vein deposit geology prior to its implementation. Note that the TIs in this paper were generated with no advice from a geologist or an expert with knowledge of vein deposits. Consultation with an expert in vein-type ore deposits would result in a more thorough and accurate analysis of the reality and reasonableness of these TIs. Notwithstanding this required expert input, there remain many avenues for investigative research. Firstly, only one area of Secondly, generating a TI to match known deposit characteristics was not attempted. It would be interesting to use exploratory information such as fracture spacing, density, orientation, length and surrounding rock permeability to see how effective a multiple-point simulation with a TI generated by this methodology would be. An extension of this would be to then model the area using a traditional simulation approach and compare the results to the multiple-point geostatistical simulation using the TI. Thirdly, the pressure gradient was only applied in the Finally, the analysis in this paper was limited to examining two-dimensional slices of the three-dimensional TIs. A more detailed analysis of the TIs in three dimensions could expose potential problems in the methodology (see Although the images were only visually inspected and compared to images of geological models of actual deposits, there are some striking similarities between the two; this is encouraging and hopefully the line of future research presented will only increase these similarities. TIs are of little use if they are not flexible enough to adapt to site-specific geological knowledge. One major advantage of this method is that multiple TIs could be created for any type of vein deposit—braided, thick, thin, multiple orientations, etc. All that is required is a fracture model of the deposit and then MPS could be applied to the modeling of the geologic units; however, there are currently many difficulties with implementing MPS that were not considered in this paper. Even though realistic TIs can be generated for vein-type deposits, there are still many challenges preventing the implementation of MPS. Having these images prepared for the day when software can effectively implement MPS is a useful step.