The relation between phase fraction and pitting corrosion resistance of S32101 duplex stainless steel was interpreted by considering the stable and metastable pitting potential and galvanic corrosion rate of the duplex-phased matrix. As the ferrite fraction increased, the potential for the stable pitting corrosion was linearly decreased which was found to be closely related to the increase in the galvanic corrosion rate between the two constituent phases. It was also revealed that the pit propagation rate was more important than the pit initiation probability in determining the overall pitting corrosion resistance of the S32101 duplex stainless steel.Solution: 0.6 M NaCl solution (25 °C) Potential sweep rate: 2 mV s Solution: 4 M NaCl solution (25 °C) Potential sweep rate: 0.1 mV s Solution: 4 M NaCl + 0.01 M HCl solution (25 °C) Immersion time: 3-10 minutes Solution: 2 M NaCl + 0.05 M HCl solution (50 °C) Immersion time: 20 minutes Duplex stainless steels (DSSs) are characterized by the balanced microstructure consisting of ferrite (α) and austenite (γ) phases [ Investigations to find the optimum phase fraction for the best resistance to pitting corrosion have been widely made for various DSSs. It is commonly accepted that the overall pitting corrosion resistance of a DSS is determined by the phase with lower PREN than the other phase. In addition, it is also reported that the highest pitting corrosion resistance is obtained at the phase fraction exhibiting the lowest difference in PRENs between the α and γ phases [ In order to explain these problems, the author group recently investigated the relation between the phase fraction and pitting corrosion resistance for UNS S31803 [ To substantiate our theory, many experimental evidences to support the theory should be provided from various kinds of DSSs. Thus in this paper, we investigated UNS S32101 DSS, which is a representative type for the lean grade DSS [ The chemical composition of the commercial S32101 alloy investigated in this paper was Fe The microstructures and chemical compositions of the α and γ phases of the annealed specimens were examined using a scanning electron microscopes (SEM, JSM-5800, JEOL, Japan) and field emission electron probe microanalysis (FE-EPMA, JXA-8530 F, JEOL, Japan), respectively. For the microscopic analysis, the specimens were mechanically ground and polished using a diamond suspension with a particle size of 1 μm, and then chemically etched in 20 ml HNO Pitting corrosion resistance of the annealed S32101 specimens was evaluated by using potentiodynamic polarization tests. The tests were conducted in a 0.6 M ( = 3.5 mass%) NaCl solution with a potential sweep rate of 2 mV s The corrosion rates of the galvanically coupled α and γ phases of the annealed specimens were investigated. The annealed specimens were cold-mounted in epoxy resin, and mechanically polished using a diamond suspension with a particle size of 1 μm. Then the polished specimens were immersed in a 2 M NaCl + 0.05 M HCl solution at 50 °C for 20 min. After the immersion, three-dimensional corroded morphology was investigated using the SEM and a surface optical profiler (Wyko NT8000, Veeco, USA [ For the Volta potential mapping of the specimen surface, SKPFM measurements were performed using an atomic force microscope (XE-100, Park Systems, Korea) in air at 25 ± 1 °C under a controlled relative humidity of 45%. For the SKPFM characterization, S32101 specimens with dimensions of 1 cm × 1 cm × 0.2 cm (L × W × T) were ground to 2000 grit with SiC emery paper and polished using a diamond suspension with a particle size of 0.25 μm. The conducting coated (Cr-Au) probes with the length of 120–130 μm, a resonance frequency of 100–220 kHz, and a spring constant of 1.8–12.5 N/m used for the measurements. The topography and corresponding Volta potential signals were simultaneously measured using a dynamic mode with a single-pass methodology. The scans were performed over areas of 40 μm × 40 μm with a scan rate of 0.5 Hz. The principle and details of the SKPFM measurement have been previously explained elsewhere [  During the isothermal annealing, partitioning of the alloying elements in the two phases occurs. The chemical compositions of the α and γ phases of each specimen annealed at different temperatures were presented in The element partitioning in the α and γ phases may result in the differences in the pitting and uniform corrosion resistance between the two phases. The PREN (PREN=[Cr]+3.3[Mo]+30[N]-[Mn]) value of each phase was calculated based on the EPMA results. As shown in  In  In order to examine the sites for pit nucleation and propagation, the annealed specimens were immersed in a 4 M NaCl + 0.01 M HCl solution for up to 10 min, and the corrosion morphologies were observed using a SEM. As seen in Corrosion depths between the α and γ phases of the annealed specimens were investigated for evaluating the galvanic corrosion rate [  The difference in the nobility of the α and γ phases was caused by the element partitioning in the two phases. As shown in It is generally accepted that the galvanic effect of the electrically coupled metals decreases as increasing the area of anodic ( The change in the E However, the existing theory fails to predict the practical resistance level against pitting corrosion of the S32101 alloy. The theory suggests that the overall resistance to pitting corrosion of the annealed S32101specimens, which is evaluated by the E In the S32101 annealed specimens, the E At this point, it is worth mentioning the Volta potential maps of the annealed S32101 specimens measured by SKPFM. The SKPFM technique has been frequently employed for characterization of relative nobility of the constituent phases of DSS [ The findings from the investigation on S32101 alloy are well matched with the conclusions from our preceding papers dealing with UNS S31803 [ For S31803 and S32750 DSSs, the changes in the PRENs of the α and γ could not explain the pit initiation sites and the optimum α fraction for the best performance, and it was revealed that the close correlation existed between the galvanic corrosion rate and the overall pitting corrosion resistance. In addition, for S32101 DSS, the examination on the initiation potentials for metastable and stable pit and the phases for pit initiation and propagation supported the decisive role of the galvanic corrosion rate in determining the overall pitting corrosion resistance. Therefore, the investigations on the DSSs consistently verified that the overall pitting corrosion resistance primarily depended on the galvanic corrosion rate of the duplex-phased matrix than the individual PRENs of the constituent phases, α and γ. We would like to suggest our papers as a guideline when designing heat treatment conditions for DSSs having the optimum localized corrosion resistance. The resistance to stable and metastable pitting corrosion of the S32101 specimens with various α fractions was investigated, and phases for pit initiation and propagation were examined. In addition, the galvanic corrosion rate of the duplex-phased matrix was measured. Combining the results, the relation between the pitting corrosion resistance and phase fraction of the S32101 alloy was discussed. The phase fraction of S32101 alloy was controlled by isothermal annealing. As the annealing temperature increased from 1040 to 1200 °C, the α fraction increased from 36.0 to 61.7 vol%. In all of the S32101 annealed specimens, the α phase exhibit lower PREN (around 20) than the γ phase, which generally decreased by enlarging of the α phase. The Epit linearly decreased as α fraction increased and the best resistance to pitting corrosion was obtained in the specimen with 36 vol% α. However, the initiation potential for metastable pitting was not affected by the α fraction. Both the pit initiation and propagation occurred in the α phase in all of the annealed specimens. In all of the annealed S32101 specimens, the α phase was preferentially corroded by galvanic coupling with the γ phase. The dissolution rate of the α phase with respect to the γ increased with enlarging of the α indicating the faster pit propagation rate in the specimen with higher α fraction. It was found that the linear decrease in the stable pitting potential was more closely correlated with the dissolution rate of α with respect to the γ phase than the individual pitting corrosion resistance level of the constituent phases of S32101 DSS. This study was financially supported by