The effect of ferrate on the flotation of chalcopyrite and molybdenite in the absence of a collector was studied in this work. Flotation tests on single minerals revealed that chalcopyrite was strongly depressed by the ferrate for pH ranging from 4 to 9, whereas molybdenite was only slightly affected. The flotation tests on mineral mixtures and real ore confirmed that ferrate could selectively depress chalcopyrite flotation without significantly affecting molybdenite floatation. Under the optimum conditions, a value of >60% was obtained for the difference between the recovery of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy results revealed that the oxide and hydroxide content and iron content of the chalcopyrite surface increased from 55.42% to 74.80% and 2.56% to 5.15%, respectively. This confirmed that the ferrate-treated chalcopyrite surface was more hydrophilic than the untreated surface. Therefore, ferrate can be used as a selective depressant of chalcopyrite in copper-molybdenum separation within a wide pH range.Molybdenum minerals are usually associated with copper minerals. The separation of copper-molybdenum sulfide ore depends on the depressant type. Various organic and inorganic depressants have been used for selective depression of the targeted mineral during copper-molybdenum flotation separation ( Ferrate (K High-purity chalcopyrite and molybdenite were obtained from Yunnan Province and Guangxi Province, China, respectively. These pure minerals were hand-picked, crushed, dry ground, and then dry screened. A particle size of −75 + 45 μm was used for flotation tests and XPS analysis. Moreover, a molybdenum-bearing copper concentrate (Liangshan Mining Ltd. Co., China) containing 26.23% copper and 0.885% molybdenum was employed. Analytically pure potassium ferrate (K In the micro-flotation test, chalcopyrite or molybdenite was treated for 2 min using an ultrasonic cleaner. Afterward, 2 g of the single mineral or mineral mixture was added to a 40 mL flotation cell of a model XGF-1600 flotation machine operating at 1200 rpm. The mineral slurry was then adjusted to the required pH by adding HCl or KOH solutions. Subsequently, ferrate and pine oil with 20 mg/L were sequentially added to the slurry, which was then conditioned for 3 min and floated for 2 min. The recovery of the single mineral was calculated from the weight of the concentrate and tailings. The recovery of mineral mixture was calculated from chemical assays of the copper and molybdenum of the concentrate and tailings. In the flotation test of the real ore, Cu-Mo bulk concentrate was added to the flotation cell, adjusted to pH ranging from weak acidic to neutral. Different concentrations of ferrate were then added to the cell and conditioned for 3 min, prior to flotation. The flotation recovery was calculated based on the weight and grade of the concentrate. To determine the chemical composition of the surface films formed by the reaction of ferrate with chalcopyrite and molybdenite, a scanning XPS microprobe system (PHI 5000 Versa Probe II, ULVAC-PHI, Japan) was used to analyze the samples with or without the ferrate treatment. The elemental composition and the XPS spectrum of each element were obtained in each case. Recoveries of molybdenite and chalcopyrite in single mineral, mineral mixtures and real ore flotation tests as a function of ferrate concentration or pH conditions are presented in To further confirm that ferrate can selectively depress chalcopyrite, thereby resulting in the separation of chalcopyrite from molybdenite, flotation tests were performed on the mineral mixtures (see The adsorption mechanism of ferrate on the chalcopyrite and molybdenite surfaces was investigated via XPS (see The O1s spectra of the chalcopyrite (see The S2p spectra of the chalcopyrite were composed of four components, with a pair of S2p3/2 and S2p1/2 peaks, which were separated by 1.18 eV. The parameters of the fitting peaks and the corresponding substances of each pair are shown in After the addition of ferrate, metal ions on the surface of the chalcopyrite were oxidized and dissolved. The fraction of CuFeS The effect of the ferrate on the oxidation of the molybdenite surface is shown in In this work, we studied the effect of ferrate on the hydrophobicity and floatability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite. The single mineral flotation test showed that the ferrate can strongly depress chalcopyrite, but had little effect on molybdenite. Flotation tests were performed on the mineral mixture and real ore. The results confirmed that the ferrate can be used as a selective depressant for flotation separation of chalcopyrite and molybdenite for pH ranging from 4 to 9 and relatively low reagent concentration. Furthermore, XPS analysis revealed that the ferrate may be reduced to Fe  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the Projects funded by