The present paper considers sampling from a stream of particulate material, where primary sampling units are increments of a specified volume or mass comprising of individual particles of the material sampled. The concepts and methods employed in this area were first developed systematically by Gy [Gy, P., 1982. Sampling of Particulate Materials—Theory and Practice. Elsevier, Amsterdam] for the case where increments were selected at equidistant mass or time intervals. The existing methodology requires further extension to cases where the increments are selected at irregularly spaced intervals. An extension is given in the present paper for particulate sampling at irregularly spaced mass intervals. The methods developed are general and apply equally to other cases where the concepts of short-term and long-term variation are readily adapted and the structure of a systematic sampling can, in principle, be implemented.
                  Specific contributions made in the paper to the area of sampling particulate materials are: (i) a weighted estimator of the critical content of a lot for dealing with the unequally spaced assays, (ii) a modification of the usual increment variance by introducing corresponding weights in the formula, (iii) an estimator of the long-term variance derived from a modified increment variance, and (iv) a measure of precision of the weighted estimator.Sampling from continuous streams is a wide area of interest in practice. In mineral processing, flowing streams of particles are routinely sampled by extracting “increments” from the stream, usually regularly, to assess the chemical, physical or mineralogical characteristics of the material. The streams are either the input material to a specified subprocess or its output to be delivered to a subsequent subprocess (or a finished product of a process ready for marketing). In chemical, pharmaceutical, biological and other manufacturing plants, similar sampling problems arise in connection with quality monitoring protocols. In the following, the term ‘quality’ is used to represent a characteristic of the material defining an aspect of the total quality performance of the material. In a chemical manufacturing plant, the quality of a product may be determined by a certain level of residual impurity in the product. In a pharmaceutical plant, it may be defined by the coarseness of the material and hence its particle size distribution. In manufacturing of machinery components, a physical property such as breaking strength of a unit may be a critical quality characteristic. One main concern in the present paper is extraction of relevant information on the magnitudes of short- and long-term variation from a sequence of observations made at unequally spaced mass intervals, for various applications. It should be noted that the methodology of analyzing data from a specific example considered here can more generally be applied to a similar sequence of data which is generated, not necessarily according to mass, but to other indexing parameters such as time, volume, spatial distance, or temperature. Throughout this paper we employ only semivariograms (variogram multiplied by a factor 1/2). For convenience, we will, however, refer to them as variograms. Data at unequally spaced mass intervals can arise in three situations. First, in preliminary stages of designing a sampling plan to extract representative samples from a flowing material, data need to be generated to obtain initial estimates of the sampling parameters. Such data could, in general, consist of observations generated from increments which are not necessarily at equally spaced mass intervals. Second, unequally spaced data could also arise from a routine sampling operation, if a time-based sampling scheme is employed and if the flow rate is not constant throughout the sampling campaign. Third, in a routine application of a mass-based sampling scheme, missing observations could occur at certain sampling times so that the resulting sequence of sample increments is no longer equidistant in terms of mass intervals. In the second and third situations, an estimate of the average quality of the lot as well as its uncertainty need to be evaluated, based on these increments. The main purpose in the first situation is to derive estimates of the magnitudes of variation so that a future sampling scheme can be planned; for example, a future equally mass-spaced scheme may be envisaged for which the sampling parameters need to be determined using the initial estimates of the magnitudes of variation. The main purpose of the latter two situations is to construct a good estimate of average quality derived from increments extracted according to a time-based or mass-based sampling scheme and the uncertainty of the estimate. In these cases too, the basic problem to be resolved is the estimation of the magnitudes of variation of the original series. In addition, the usual method of assessing uncertainty or sampling error of the average quality estimate needs to be modified to allow for the irregularity of the mass intervals between successive increments. One specific problem which motivated the methodology of the present paper arose in connection with planning of sampling protocols for routine use in a magnesia production plant which deals with a sequence of down-stream processing operations. The first of these operations is a mine-site beneficiation operation and its output streams need to be monitored to assess the quality of the stock piles created subsequently. Information on the average “quality” of each stock pile is necessary in deciding the mixing strategies for the stock piles to provide a suitable input to the calcination process, the next in the sequence of down-stream processes. During start-up operations, preliminary data were generated to obtain information on the variation of two important impurity characteristics, namely, SiO One main import of the present paper is a clearer enunciation of the components of variation in a sequence of data on a mineral characteristic collected at different time or mass points as given by A second main import of the paper is a weighted estimator of the critical content of a lot for unequally spaced assay data, together with a method of assessment of its uncertainty. The estimated magnitudes of variation mentioned earlier are required for this assessment. In In In In In In In The following practical problem arose at Queensland Magnesia (QMAG) and a subsequent analysis of the data motivated the methodology of the present paper. At QMAG, mined material passes through a beneficiation process where it is scrubbed in log-washers and, in crushed or uncrushed form, passes through a density separation process. This produces low grade (floats) and high grade (sinks) material. Both types of ‘sinks’ material (crushed or uncrushed) are conveyed through a sampling point and are stockpiled separately. Similarly both types of ‘floats’ material (crushed or uncrushed) are conveyed through a parallel sampling point and are stockpiled separately. A sampling strategy is needed for each of the four streams: (i) Crushed-Sinks (CS), (ii) Crushed-Floats (CF), (ii) Uncrushed-Sinks (US), and (iv) Uncrushed-Floats (UF). The ultimate purpose is to estimate, on a routine basis, the average quality of the consignments delivered to each of the stockpiles. Methodology is currently available for determining the sampling parameters of a sampling scheme with regularly spaced mass intervals, see At the preproduction stage of the plant operations, data are available in the form of total tonnage and average quality of each of the consignments that were sequentially delivered to the respective stockpiles. For the case of the floats material, the extent of the consignments is small so that the variation between the consignments can be regarded as a reasonable approximation to the variation between individual increments from which the consignment averages are derived. In particular, the stock sequence data of the CF material can be recast as data collected at irregularly spaced points of a continuously flowing stream of CF material. The data on CF stock sequence are given in A usual approach to extracting information on magnitudes of variation from data generated at a set of tonnage intervals is to inspect the variogram and fit a theoretical model. The observed variogram calculated from the sample data is depicted in As is seen, the observed variogram is not smooth due to irregular grouping of data points on the mass axis. The crudeness is usually overcome by a fitting of an empirical model, such as (i) linear, (ii) exponential, or (iii) spherical variogram models to the observed data. As shown in Methodology is developed in the present paper to overcome the difficulty stated above. An alternative method of estimating the magnitudes of variation is developed and illustrated for the CF stock sequence data of Suppose that a flowing particulate material representing a lot is let to pass through a sampling point for extracting a representative sample. The nature of quality variation of the particles can then be described by the types of ‘distance’ between the different particles. Thus, at the shortest or closest level the distance is the extent of individual particles and the best way to express variation for such a distance is in terms of particles selected from a homogeneous mix; the sampling error caused by such variation, i.e., size and compositional variation, is known as the fundamental error. The next level of ‘distance’ between particles is in terms of groups of particles. In many practical situations, segregation of particles occurs due to size or density of particles; thus groups of ‘like’ particles are formed in the lot. The ‘distance’ between particles subjected to segregation can be measured by the extent between groups of homogeneously mixed particle clusters. When homogeneous mixing cannot be assumed between particles or even between clusters of particles, the model for variation must be extended to allow for additional types of variation. Such variation occurs naturally between particles separated by larger mass intervals in a flowing stream, and is referred to as long-term variation. In general, trend-like movements and cyclical movements in the observations contribute to the types of variation that are additional to size-compositional and grouping-segregation variations Denote a quality characteristic of the flowing material at time The total mass of the material up to time The average quality content of the material over a total time period The variational properties of the process that generate the unobservable quality curve As pointed out by The variogram for Thus a realistic representation is The discreteness of the particulate material results in the variation at the shortest ‘lag’ level and this is precisely the variation of particles within the lot induced by the size-compositional variation and the variation due to grouping and segregation. A detailed study of the grouping and segregation variation is given in When the stream of flowing material is intercepted to extract an increment at time The process of making an observation This aspect is represented by the model For two observations at mass points We next assume that the function This leads to modeling the variogram of the series { In this section we document three special forms of the variogram that are in common use. We also define measures of variation in terms of the parameters of the variogram model specified. These measures are important in planning a future sampling strategy, as discussed in The contributions from various sources of variation need to be quantified for two purposes. If the data are generated from a pilot sampling plan carried out for the purpose of constructing a more accurate design of a future sampling strategy, the magnitudes of short-term and long-term variation are needed to estimate the sampling parameters. If the data are from a mass-based plan with missing observations or if the missing observations are replaced by sampling at a sampling time close to the original scheduled time, the mass intervals between successive observations are unequal. The same is true for a time-based sampling with a non-constant flow rate. Evaluation of the uncertainty of average quality estimate based on such irregularly spaced sampling intervals on the mass axis is also a problem which requires the estimation of magnitudes of short-term and long-term variation. The most important components of short-term variation are (i) analytical or calibration error, (ii) size-compositional variation and (iii) the grouping-segregation variation. A detailed study of the grouping and segregation variation can be found in The main technique for evaluating the magnitude of long-term variation is the variogram technique. The basic idea is to model the observed variogram by a reasonable empirical model at low lags and extract the parameter estimates representing the local and long-term variation. From consideration of the general shape of the observed variogram, a number of empirical models can be chosen The theoretical variogram is modeled as The theoretical variogram is modeled in this case as The parameters The theoretical variogram is modeled in this case as The parameters In each of the three special models considered in Even though A flat variogram could mean either the short-term variation or the combination of both short-term and long-term variation. If there exists only short-term variation, the flat variogram gives an estimate of In the case of an increasing variogram, the observed variogram should start to increase as the ‘lag’ between the observations becomes larger than the extent over which the short-term variation holds; the increase is due to variation from additional sources and is gradual due to correlation between increments. The net increase over a specified mass interval is then the product of the rate of increase over the interval and its length. In the case of the linear variogram, the ratio, The flowing material is sampled over a time period of duration This increment is then subsampled to extract an ‘analysis sample’ from which a determination In sampling the flowing material the main quantity of interest is the true (unknown) average quality content of the material over the sampling period ( Using the mean value theorem for the integrals, we have an approximation to A pragmatic estimate of the quantity Thus an estimate of Some remarks are now in order. The choice of the estimator The weighted-assay estimator, Since the estimator The quantity An estimate of the underlying true variogram is the observed variogram of the observations at Let The quantity Next we define the set of indicator functions, The observed variogram at mass-lag In The expected value and the sampling variance of the weighted average From The sampling variance of the estimator Next, the expected value of the weighted increment variance can be derived as follows. Suppose we reparametrize the variogram as in Next, it can be shown that the expected value of the observed variogram can also be derived at each fixed value of its lag. From The above result shows that, in general, the expected value of the observed variogram at For the linear theoretical variogram, however, define Then the observed variogram at Suppose that the purpose of the current sampling scheme is to estimate the average quality of a stockpile from which Using first principles (see Thus using the expressions The above variance is a conditional variance in the sense that the variation of all the random quantities is computed conditional on a particular choice of the sampling times observed. It is different to the measures of sampling variances provided by Expressions for special cases can readily be deduced from the general expression in For This is based on the assumption that the sample data were generated by a systematic sampling scheme with a random start in the first sampling interval and that It should be noted here that formulae for equally spaced data have also been derived by We next consider the estimation of the parameters of a chosen theoretical model for the observed variogram. The magnitudes of the short-term and long-term variation can then be readily estimated for a given sampling interval. Two methods are investigated. The first is a currently available technique and is based on the actual fitting of the observed variogram. The second method is an alternative method proposed as a more natural technique of estimating the parameters of the theoretical variogram by using independent estimates of In principle, the parameters of a chosen variogram model can be estimated by using an observed variogram alone. The model can be fitted to the observed variogram by using some ‘best’ fitting technique such as weighted least squares approach (see The criterion The above expression can readily be specialized to the cases of linear, exponential and spherical variogram models, using A blind fitting of an empirical model to the observed variogram can lead to physically unrealistic values of The method of employing the fitted variogram by weighted least squares uses the observed variogram over a limited range and, thus, does not necessarily use all the available data. Moreover, the parameter Hence if A realistic estimate of the magnitude of short-term variation can be obtained by an independent experiment conducted to measure the size-compositional variation, the analytical error and grouping-segregation error as discussed earlier in the present An important consequence of the result We discuss the application of For the case of the linear variogram For the case of the exponential variogram For fixed For the case of the spherical variogram In planning a mass-based sampling scheme, two sampling parameters are needed: the amount of sample mass per increment and the number of increments required for a given total mass interval. For this purpose, the estimates of As discussed in In a non-mineral sampling situation, such as a bio-chemical or manufacturing operation, the short-term variation is usually estimated from replicate measurements on the same units or similar units within batches. Thus setting levels of contribution from short-term variation to the average quality estimate enables one to determine the number of replicate determinations needed. As for determining the number of increments (i.e., sampling points) in a given total sampling interval one can adopt the following approach. Suppose that an equally spaced sampling scheme, termed mass-based sampling scheme of equal sampling interval Thus if a set level of relative uncertainty is The SiO From the data of The standard deviation The standard deviation of the magnitude of short-term variation based on the estimate The estimate For this crush-floats material, a separate experiment was conducted to extract five closely cut increments The sampling variance of the estimate The CaO data given in Suppose that the above measures of variation are to be employed for determining the sampling frequency of a mass-based sampling scheme for a 500-tonnage interval to achieve a relative uncertainty of 5%. One can apply the formula Using the corresponding magnitudes of variation for the CaO data, it was found that the short-term variation level is already about 5% relative to the mean and the resulting number of increments is Combining the two analyses given above, it can be concluded that a larger increment mass of about 3 kg taken every 70-tonnage interval will result in the target uncertainty of 5% relative for the average quality estimate of a stock defined by either SiO The two analyses discussed above are based on an assumption that the underlying variogram is a linear variogram of The usefulness of the present development is that one can consider various scenarios using the estimates of the magnitudes of variation derived. Ultimately, the assessment of the various scenarios is only as reliable as these estimates of variation derived from the data. A thorough study of the reliability of the proposed estimate of long-term variation parameter is beyond the present paper. However, a limited simulation study is given in The following simulation procedure was carried out to study the sampling behaviour of the alternative estimator Under condition (a), it is required to generate the data according to the following model (see We set the values of the two variances at the values close to the actual estimates obtained for the specific example in The total number of sampling times is set at Step 1: For time “0”, generate a random normal variate, Step 2: For time “1”, generate a random normal variate, Step 3: For time “ Step 4: Compute Step 5: Calculate the value of Step 6: Repeat Steps 1 to 5 one thousand times. The results of the one thousand simulations are tabulated in The present paper considers the formulation of a model for the variational properties of a flowing particulate material in such a way that the two theories of It is also argued that the observed variogram does not generally provide sufficient information on certain parameters of the variogram especially those related to the first three sources of variation. Methods of estimation of the magnitudes of variation from these various sources are discussed. In particular, the use of a fitted model of the observed variogram is compared with the use of the theoretical variogram model in conjunction with the increment variance and an external experiment which generates data on short-term variation directly. An example is given where the method of fitted observed variogram fails and the latter method is the only alternative to analyze the data. The methods described in the present paper are readily adapted to the case of manufacturing situations where the material being sampled are separately identifiable units. The magnitude of short-term variation is then measured from repeated measurements from the same unit and/or measurements in the same batch or locality, and the magnitude of long-term variation is measured between batches. For such a case, the short-term variation comes from direct measurements of repeatability employed in standard practice and hence is a more simplified quantity to estimate than is the case with sampling by an amount. It should also be noted that the treatment of the present paper is based on the assumption that the masses are deterministic variables that are perfectly known. In practice, they are random variables introducing additional errors to average quality estimation. The author wishes to thank Queensland Magnesia for the permission to publish the data of