Purpose
                  Tibia plateau fracture (TPF) treatment aims at achieving a stable, aligned, mobile, painless knee and preventing post-traumatic osteoarthritis. To achieve this goal, surgeons consider criteria such as patients' characteristics, severity, risk of complications, fracture displacement/depression, degree of soft tissue injury. However, body mass index (BMI) is not considered as a risk factor in literature. Our study was conducted to find out any possible correlation between BMI and functional scores or radiological score separately.
               
                  Methods
                  Retrospective analysis of case series between 2011 and 2014 was done on the database of a tertiary hospital in Istanbul. There were 67 TPF patients (54 males, 13 females) in the study. Relationship between BMI and functional knee scores or radiological score was compared statistically. Closed fractures with both high-energy and low-energy injury were included in the study. Patients with open fracture, multi-trauma presence, meniscus and/or ligamentous injury, increased co-morbidity, inadequate records (25 cases in all) were excluded. Surgery type, Schatzker classification, injury side, trauma energy, and gender were considered as possible risk factors. Binary regression analysis was done for possible factors affecting functional knee scores and radiologic score.
               
                  Results
                  Model summary calculations were done as Nagelkerke R2 test for Knee Society score, Lysholm knee score, and Ahlback and Rydberg radiologic scores, which were 0.648, 0.831, and 0.327 respectively. Homer–Lemeshow test values were 0.976, 0.998, and 0.362, respectively. There is negative correlation between BMI and both knee function scores. There is no correlation between BMI and radiologic score.
               
                  Conclusion
                  An increase in BMI has a negative effect on functional knee scores after surgical treatment of TPFs. Therefore, BMI should be considered as a risk factor for surgical treatment of TPFs.One of the most frequent intra-articular fractures is tibial plateau fracture (TPF), which usually arises due to high energy trauma. However, only 1% of all the fracture cases for whole population, and 8% of fracture cases in the elderly people are TPF. Surgical treatment of TPF consists of three parts as follows: (1) simple medial and lateral tibial plateau fractures without joint depression can be treated by closed reduction and cannulated cancellous screws (CCS) or single buttress plating or in combination; (2) if joint depression or fracture displacement is obvious, open reduction and joint elevation and support with bone grafting will be necessary; (3) bilateral plateau fractures should be treated with double plating. The body mass index (BMI) has different impact on different orthopaedic procedures. An increase in BMI leads to higher complication rates. After obtaining institutional review board approval, hospital database system was used to conduct a retrospective case-control study of patients who underwent open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF) of TPF from 2011 to 2014. Patient registry was reviewed for general demographics, mechanism of injury, associated injuries, fracture pattern, surgical procedure, and patients were called for last follow-up. All patients >18 years old received TPF surgical treatment with internal fixation were collected. There were 95 patients in the database system. Closed fractures with both high-energy and low-energy injury were included in the study. Patients with open fracture, multi-trauma presence, meniscus and/or ligamentous injury, increased co-morbidity, inadequate records (25 cases in all) were excluded. There were 70 patients in the study, 3 patients were lost to follow-up. Sixty-seven fracture patients were available for last functional and radiologic follow-up. Study population included 54 males, 13 females. Mean age at injury was 42.6 years (20–73). Sides of injury were 30 left, 37 right knees. Mean follow-up time is 3.7 years (2–6 years). All patients were grouped according to BMI as slim (<18.5), normal (18.5–25), overweight (25–30), obese class I (30–35), obese class II (35–40), and obese class III (>40). BMI distribution of patients were as 22 normal, 28 overweight, 11 obesity class I, and 5 obesity class II. All the patients with TPF in the study received operation in 3–10 days after trauma, depends on soft tissue status. Medial and/or lateral proximal tibia anatomic locked plate and 6.5 mm diameter CCS were used, per fracture pattern. CCS were used in 3 of 35 patients in addition to lateral plate. CCS were used in 5 of 15 patients in addition to medial plate. Bilateral plates with double incision were used in 18 patients. Submeniscal arthrotomy was done in all cases for evaluation of meniscus and chondral injury, also physical examination was done for ligamentous injury after fracture fixation. Same side autologous iliac graft was used in all patients. Drain was adapted to all incisions. Long leg splint was applied to all patients after surgery. At the end of second week, long leg splints and sutures were removed. Among the 67 patients in the study, 60 patients followed the rehabilitation clinic after suture removal, 7 patients who did not participate in hospital rehabilitation program due to personal issues were trained under the guidance of home rehabilitation program. Partial loading was allowed until observed radiological union. Postoperative follow-up was carried out at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, 12 months, then annually, and called for last visit. TPF classification was done according to Schatzker classification. Knee anteroposterior and lateral view X-rays were studied in emergency room. Indication for surgery in TPF was more than 5 mm step in joint line or condylar widening more than 5 mm in clinic. If there was indication for surgery, computerized tomography of knee will be conducted to define extension, pattern and comminution of fracture, collapse and displacement of joint line. IBM SPSS v21.0 (IBM Corp. Armonk, NY, USA) software was used for data analysis. Demographic parameters were expressed as mean. Surgery type, Schatzker classification, injury side, trauma energy, and gender were considered as possible risk factors, given in Mean follow-up time was 3.7 years (2–6 years). There was no neurovascular deficit in any of patients. Non-union was not seen and secondary surgery was not needed in any patients. Superficial wound infection was treated with antibiotics in 9 patients, 1 normal BMI, 6 overweight BMI and 2 obese BMI. Possible risk factors effecting post-surgical functional knee scores and radiological outcome are described as surgery type, fracture type as Schatzker classification, fracture side, trauma energy, gender, and BMI. Binary regression analysis was done for KSS and LKS functional scores, and RNR radiologic outcome according to these variables ( Knee is one of the most important joints of the locomotor system, which is prone to injury. Without proper treatment, severe TPF leads to osteoarthritis. The main purposes of TPF treatment are to prevent from step in joint line, instability, angular deformity, and non-union; to provide pain-free full range of motion. Surgical treatment for TPF was studied by many authors and different opinions were expressed. Traction and early continuous passive movement were started and good results were declared by Marwah et al Mean age reported in literature is 55 years, 48 years, and 57 years in studies of Rasmussen, Majority of heavy works are occupied by men, therefore TPF are more common in men, as stated in literature. TPF in women is increased with age secondary to osteoporosis; only 3 out of 13 female had osteoporosis-related fractures. The rest of the fractures happen to women were high-energy trauma fractures. Osteoporosis-related fractures were less in our series than literature, maybe due to different sociocultural structure. Distribution of TPF in lateral, medial and bicondylar plateau were 50%–75%, 10%–23%, and 20%–30%, respectively. We found no relationship between fracture type and functional outcomes statistically. Also, no relationship between BMI and radiologic criteria was found. Fracture type and functional results are not related statistically in the study of Etel et al Obese people are at risk of maintaining their skin integrity due to many pathogenic factors. Also, obesity has serious medical comorbidities and several wound risk factors. Some of these factors are preventable, however others are not. Cellular and molecular alterations, oxidative stress, chronic low-grade inflammation, impaired vascularity, venous insufficiency, and nutrient deficiency are pathogenic factors that impair maintaining skin integrity. Due to the factors mentioned above, obesity is associated with increased risk of wound dehiscence and superficial wound infection in orthopaedic surgery. Impact of obesity on complications and results in orthopaedic procedures is challenging. This study has a few limitations: retrospective design of the study; non-homogenous distribution due to small number of study population; lack of preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluation. Due to small number of participants, data analysis for each Schatzker type could not be done. Therefore, results of our study cannot be generalized for each Schatzker type. Preoperative MRI study could indicate possible cartilage, meniscus and ligament damage which all may lead to worse outcomes, therefore better inclusion - exclusion criteria could be applied to patients. Thus risk factor analysis could be done more accurately. BMI is a risk factor for functional knee scores in surgical treatment of TPFs. Therefore, patients with increased BMI should be informed before surgical treatment about possible worse outcome. However, prospective, controlled, larger study populations are necessary for evaluation of effect of BMI on each Schatzker type. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at