Pyrometallurgy is often used in the industrial process for treating gold-bearing slime. Slag compositions have remarkable influences on gold recovery and gold content in slag. In this paper, the relationships between the slag compositions in the soda–borax–silica glass-salt system and the gold content in the slag are investigated by using nonlinear regression and artificial neural network. A neural network model for estimating the gold contents of different slag compositions is presented, including the neural network type, structure and its learning algorithms. The study indicates that the three-layer back propagation neural network model can be applied to estimate gold content in the slag. Compared with the traditional regression methods, the neural network has many advantages.In the gold manufactory industry, pyrometallurgical treatment ( However, smelting gold slime is a complicated process which involves the chemical reactions in multi-phases. Therefore, it is usually hard to describe the relationships between slag compositions and gold content in the slag explicitly. Currently, statistical methods such as linear or nonlinear regression methods are generally used to deal with this problem ( From an industrial point of view, prediction of gold content in the slag with different slag compositions before smelting can be an important object for maximising gold recovery and lowering production cost. In this research, the soda–borax–silica glass-salt system ( As mentioned above, the ANN approach can be a very good choice in this regard, as it exhibits a significant ability in simulating and controlling various processes in which different parameters are interacting simultaneously. Therefore, the aim of this study is threefold: (i) to establish the relationships between the gold content in the slag and the use of the slag composition system by using the traditional linear regression method; (ii) to establish an ANN model that can predict the gold content in slag when adopting different slag compositions; (iii) to compare these two ways to identify the advantages and disadvantages, if any. The intermediate frequency induction furnace is often used in pyrometallurgy to produce gold from gold slime. In the smelting process, fluxing agents must be added to separate the gold–sliver phase from others. In industries, the common chemicals used for this purpose include soda, borax, silica glass, and fluorite. The negative aspect in doing so is the high gold concentration in the slag. Sometimes, it can be as high as up to 300–500 As seen in By using nonlinear regression technique, a regression formula for estimating the gold content is deduced for these results as the follows: This formula can be used for calculating or estimating the gold content in the slag for the completed experiments, of course, errors will be observed, and we will come back to this later. In this paper, an artificial neural network model is developed for estimating or predicting gold content in the slag in pyrometallurgy. Artificial neural network is a network with nodes or neurons analogous to the biological neurons. The nodes are interconnected to the weighted links and organised in layers. The performance of a neural network depends mainly on the weights of its connections. The knowledge is represented and stored by the weights (strength) of the connections between the neurons (processors). If correct weights can be trained then an ANN can do an exceptional function. There have been many studies on the application of neural networks involving many concrete applications such as pattern recognition, pattern classification and nonlinear problems. Although there are different types of ANN, feed-forward multilayer perception (MLP) is probably the most widely used due to its powerful modelling capability ( The adopted ANN model should correspond to the conditions in the experiments and be able to model the changes of gold content in the slag along with the slag compositions. In practice, the structure of the MLP includes only a single hidden layer with five nodes, which is of enough sophistication to deal with the pyrometallurgical experiments. In addition, there are four nodes in the input layer corresponding to the four fluxing agents, and one node in the output layer to represent the gold content in the slag. Undoubtedly, back-propagation algorithm was very useful to train the network in recent years. The back-propagation training algorithm is an iterative gradient algorithm designed to minimise the main square between the predicted output and the desired output. The algorithm of back-propagation training, used in this study, is summarized in From the preceding discussion, it becomes apparent that the neural network should undergo a proper training process before it can be used for estimating the amounts of gold in the slag. Learning is a process by which the neural network adjusts its weights to represent the property. The network is exposed to the training data which are listed in In It can be seen that the neural network has given better estimations of gold content in the slag with smaller errors than using nonlinear regression. To illustrate this point more clearly, we plot a graph which shows the estimated values against the actual experimental results, as shown in This paper uses two techniques – artificial neural networks and nonlinear regression – to estimate gold content in the slag in pyrometallurgical processes of slag compositions. (i) This paper has demonstrated that artificial neural network can be used to determine the relationships between slag compositions and gold content in the slag. Compared with the traditional regression method, it makes no functional assumptions on the relationships, hence, eliminates the errors brought in by man. As seen in this research, a robust artificial network has produced better estimations on the gold content in the slag with higher precision. Therefore, it can be regarded as a substitute for nonlinear regression in some cases. (ii) Neural networks have capacities that go beyond algorithmic programming and work very well for nonlinear problems. Therefore, it can be a very powerful tool for treating the experimental data in other similar pyrometallurgical processes.