An accurate estimation of rainfall-induced instability of slopes for extremely nonhomogeneous materials such as lignite mine spoils is a major challenge. This paper investigates the stability of nonhomogeneous soil slopes with respect to slip surface development, size of sliding volume, and determination of safety factor. Specified dependent random variables are cross-correlated using a multivariate Gaussian copula, the use of which provides a faster and more accurate representation of the inter-dependent properties of randomly-distributed soil. A Monte-Carlo simulation is used to generate a series of multivariate random fields for slopes. These are then implemented in Abaqus and analysed under constant rainfall conditions using a fully coupled hydro-elasto-plastic model. The resulting stress, strain, pore pressure, and displacement data are further processed in MATLAB to evaluate critical slip surfaces and safety factors. Results indicate that the factor of safety in a homogenous case is overestimated compared to the nonhomogeneous condition, while the sliding volume is underestimated. Moreover, the factor of safety decreases as the rainfall simulation continues and the probability of failure increases to nearly 100% after 10 days of rainfall. The framework developed in this paper can provide guidance for conducting relatively inexpensive probabilistic analyses.Soils are spatially variable materials and their variability should be considered in order for numerical models to realistically represent the actual in-situ conditions. As a result, there are increasing numbers of studies which apply probabilistic methods to many geotechnical analyses. Slope stability is a branch of geotechnical engineering in which probabilistic approaches have been extensively used. However, most of these studies focused on the stability of dry or saturated slopes While the use of auto-correlation functions for a single random geotechnical property is relatively straightforward The present study is motivated by the potential catastrophic consequences of instabilities in lignite mine spoil dumps Previous studies have investigated the mechanisms of rainfall infiltration into unsaturated soil Despite the relatively large number of studies on rainfall-induced slope instabilities in unsaturated soils, only a few studies have considered the spatial variability of geotechnical properties. Zhang et al. The present study considers four dependent random variables of void ratio, dry unit weight, cohesion, and friction angle which are cross-correlated using a multivariate Gaussian copula. The cross-correlated copula is the best-fit copula to an existing dataset A model was constructed in Abaqus with specified uniform values for hydro-mechanical properties. Spatial variability of the properties was then implemented, based on a conditional multivariate random field technique. The fundamentals of this modelling approach and the basic governing equations are briefly explained in this section. Within an unsaturated soil framework, the volumetric flow rate of water through a unit area, Note that the last term on the right hand side of the above equation is coupling the unsaturated flow to mechanical deformation, with Assuming the air phase is continuous, the excess air pressure can be neglected and hence, the Bishop’s definition of effective stress, The classical approach in solid mechanics employs an additive strain rate decomposition that separates the elastic and plastic parts of the strain rate (  The numerical model was discretised with a total of 1376 elements of CPE8RP (8-node plane strain quadratic, reduced integration with pore pressure degree of freedom) elements. As shown in The theory of random fields In order to construct the joint probability distributions of multivariate data, a copula function can be used. Copulas are functions that relate the multivariate distribution functions to their one-dimensional distribution functions. Let The first step in generating the conditional random field is to identify the dependence structure of multiple properties as observed in the field. This enables a rigorous characterisation of the cross-correlation among multiple geotechnical properties. In order to achieve this, a dataset from Soenksen et al. The second step is finding the parameters for the corresponding 4-dimensional Gaussian copula using these fitted marginal distributions. To do this, the previously obtained distribution functions were used to give the measured data in standard uniform distribution space. Then, the transformed data were employed to estimate the best-fit copula using the maximum likelihood method as implemented in MATLAB In order to construct a random field, the relationship between any two observations in the field needs to be considered through their separation distance and scales of fluctuation. There are a number of correlation structures available, such as the Gaussian auto-correlation presented below Having the coordinates of each node in the mesh structure introduced previously, an auto-correlation matrix can be obtained using the auto-correlation function above, with a dimension of  Prior to presenting results from Monte-Carlo simulations, the methodology for critical slip surface and safety factor calculation are explained here. Abaqus results of stress, strain, pore pressure, and displacements were imported into MATLAB and used to estimate the critical slip surface of the slope using an optimisation technique at 6-h intervals of simulated rainfall. Many strategies for critical slip surface determination have been developed using a variety of optimisation algorithms For an arbitrary slip surface whose path is defined by The goal is to find a geometry for path The search strategy employed in this paper is similar to that in Kim and Lee The numerical model presented in To optimise the meshing structure of the model, several realisations of the multivariate random field were selected and applied in the numerical model. The mesh structure in Then, the input files were submitted to Abaqus using a batch file to run in sequence. As stated earlier, development of excessive plastic strain led to termination of many cases before the intended 10 days of simulated rainfall. Non-convergence of a finite element model is widely used as a criterion for slope failure   Considering the distribution of FoS (and cases of non-convergence) from the Monte-Carlo simulation, the probability of failure ( This approach may have some limitations (e.g. concerns over use of non-convergence as a failure criterion can be criticised  In order to further analyse the mechanism of failure within the unsaturated slope, the evolution of factor of safety as a function of the position of water table was investigated. This was done using the level of water on the right boundary of the model (the highest point of the water table). This value represents the pressure head at the bottom right corner of the model (point E in The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effect of spatial variability of soil properties on the stability of an unsaturated slope subjected to rainfall infiltration over a duration of 10-days. Four dependent random field variables (void ratio, dry unit weight, cohesion, and friction angle) were considered. A Monte-Carlo simulation was adopted to generate a series of realisations of multivariate random fields to be used as input parameters for a numerical model in Abaqus. An optimisation technique was used to interrogate the random field numerical model results in order to estimate slip surfaces, size of sliding volume, and factor of safety at 6-hour intervals of simulated rainfall; results were compared against those from a homogeneous soil slope. While considering multivariate random field increases the complexity of simulation, its effect on the accuracy of slope stability analysis under rainfall is significant and should not be neglected. The use of copula theory is also of great importance as it provides a faster and more accurate representation of the inter-dependent properties of soil with random excavation and deposition techniques, such as those used for lignite mine spoils. The multivariate random field results indicated that, after a specific rainfall duration, the factor of safety (FoS) for the nonhomogeneous case was normally lower than the homogenous condition. The sliding volume was underestimated in the homogenous case compared to the nonhomogeneous case. The variation of safety factor against water level within the slope showed a linear trend, indicating that the water table was the main mechanism driving failure for the unsaturated slopes considered in this investigation. It was shown that the probability of failure is a more representative index for stability of slopes compared to FoS, as demonstrated using the evolution of probability of failure with rainfall time. In the results presented in the paper, the probability of failure was shown to increase from nearly zero to almost 100 per cent during 10 days of rainfall, which not only highlights the importance of the probabilistic approach but also illustrates the significance of rainfall infiltration on stability of unsaturated slopes. The methodology presented in this paper can be considered as a framework for probabilistic slope stability analyses. The paper provides detailed explanations of the steps needed to be taken for generation of dependent random parameters and the numerical simulation of unsaturated slopes with random fields. It should be noted, however, that in this paper, the SWCC parameters are considered to be constant, while in reality they will vary spatially. Implementing the variability of SWCC parameters in the framework presented in this paper framework is possible through the random field generation methodology. However, a comprehensive experimental dataset is required in order to establish the cross-correlation structure of SWCC parameters with other geotechnical properties. Future research, therefore, should focus on development of such experimental data. Once such data is established, the implementation of spatially variable SWCC parameters is possible through the framework developed in this paper. The adopted optimisation methods to evaluate slip surface can also enhance the computational efficiency of the probabilistic approach compared to other methods, such as the strength reduction technique. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the