Finely grained samples of copper(I) sulphide were leached by H2SO4 solution with added NaNO3. The occurrence probability of chemical reactions was analysed based on literature data and products which were formed during the process and the overall leaching reaction was defined. The effect of temperature, concentration of NaNO3 and H2SO4, stirring speed, phase ratio and time, on the leaching degree of copper was studied. The quantity of copper dissolved increases with growth of the values of all the parameters. Kinetic analysis shows that the leaching mechanism is very complex. By using appropriate mathematical kinetic models, it is found that the leaching rate is chemically controlled. It was concluded that the leaching reaction is first order with respect to the concentration of NaNO3 and second order with respect to the concentration of H2SO4.Hydrometallurgical processes provide an efficient method for processing of low-grade complex ores. In spite of the fact that in pyrometallurgical processes, the sulphide sulphur is used as fuel, hydrometallurgical processes are increasingly popular because of environmental protection On the basis of literature data of the copper(I) sulphide leaching in oxidized, acidic medium and the products in the solution, as well as in the solid residues of leaching, determined by X-ray analysis, the chemical reactions chosen for study in the Cu In order to clarify the occurrence probability and priority of quoted The negative values of Gibbs energy change ΔG The more negative ΔG E–pH diagrams show the thermodynamic stability of water solution components and dependence on pH values and electrochemical potential E–pH diagrams for systems S–H From Cu(I) sulphide, from RTB Bor mine, Serbia, with 80.4% of Cu and 18.6% of S and density of 5.04 kg/dm The following parameters were studied: temperature (°C): 40, 60, 80 and 90; concentration of NaNO  The temperature has very strong influence on the copper leaching degree. It suggests that the process is chemically controlled, which has been confirmed in further kinetic analysis. The quantity of leached copper increases when the temperature is increased from 40 to 90 °C. This is probably due to the molecules in the reaction system not possessing enough energy which is needed for the successful reaction (activation energy) at those temperatures. A remarkable jump in leaching degree is noticeable between 60 and 80 °C. The maximum leaching degree is 97.8% at 90 °C and after 30 min. The influence of NaNO The influence of H The quantity of leached copper depends strongly on the solution acidity and it increases with the growth of H The influence of stirring speed on leaching degree was studied by changing of stirring speed from 200 to 450 min The influence of solid–liquid ratio (S/L) on the leaching degree was studied under the following conditions: 80 °C, 0.4 mol dm In order to investigate the leaching process mechanism, the solid products were exposed to the X-ray analysis and in this way, their phase content was determined. The solid residues obtained at 60 and 90 °C under the following conditions: stirring speed 300 min The process of copper(I) sulphide leaching in H Activation energy for the process of copper(I) sulphide leaching was determined by using the kinetic equations of Ginstling-Brounshtein, Spenser-Topley and Wadsworth The activation energy of 60±0.7 kJ/mol for the Cu Reaction order for NaNO The copper(I) sulphide leaching is a first-order reaction with respect to the concentration of NaNO The copper(I) sulphide leaching is a second-order reaction with respect to the concentration of H From the results obtained in the study of copper(I) sulphide leaching by H On the basis of experimental data, thermodynamic calculations and the products in the solution, as well as in the solid residues, determined by X-ray analysis, the chemistry mechanism is determined by the following reactions: the first leaching stage The influence of working parameters on the leaching degree shows that the increase in values of all working parameters affects the increase in the quantity of the dissolved copper. The temperature influence on the reaction rate is especially great: the temperature increase from 40 to 90 °C is followed by an increase in leaching degree from 10% to 98%. The value of activation energy, 60±0.7 kJ/mol, calculated by applying the Spenser-Topley equation, proves that the leaching process is chemically controlled. The copper(I) sulphide leaching is a first-order reaction with respect to the concentration of NaNO The copper(I) sulphide leaching is a second-order reaction with respect to the concentration of H