Bastnäsite is an important mineral resource in the production of rare earth materials and is usually beneficiated by flotation. The flotation of bastnäsite is problematic due to the competitive adsorption of hydroxamate collector on bastnäsite and its associated calcium-bearing gangue minerals such as fluorite. One strategy to solve this problem is to use effective depressants to depress the gangue minerals. However, the current depressants all have some drawbacks. In this study, the effect of ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) as a depressant was tested in the flotation of single mineral of bastnäsite and fluorite and their mixture. The mechanism underpinning the role of EDTA was investigated through theoretical thermodynamic calculation, zeta potential and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements. The results show that fluorite was significantly depressed, while the flotation of bastnäsite was almost unaffected when EDTA was present. The separation index between bastnäsite and fluorite increased from 1.18 to 12.66 with the increase of EDTA concentration from 0 to 7.79 kg/t. It was found that EDTA could dissolve the chemically adsorbed octyl hydroxamic acid (OHA) on fluorite through the formation of soluble Ca-EDTA complexes, whereas the chemically adsorbed OHA on bastnäsite was more stable and could not be transformed into Ce-EDTA spontaneously. Therefore, the flotation of fluorite was selectively depressed by EDTA. The results show that EDTA was a promising depressant for fluorite gangue mineral in bastnäsite flotation.Nowadays, rare earth elements (REE) and compounds are of significant importance for a range of rapidly expanding industrial applications including catalysis, metallurgy, renewable energy, and special materials due to their unique electrical, magnetic, optical and chemical properties ( Over the past decades, progress has been made in developing more selective collectors, such as hydroxamate, to replace less effective, fatty acid in rare earth ore flotation ( Typical depressants used in bastnäsite flotation include sodium silicate, sodium hexafluorosilicate, lignin sulfonate and sodium carbonate ( EDTA is a common complexing agent, which has often been used in sulphide minerals flotation to remove the hydrophilic metal hydroxide layers from mineral surface and thus restore the floatability of oxidized sulphide minerals ( The bastnäsite sample was obtained from the Weishanhu Rare Earth Mine in Shandong Province, China. The bastnäsite sample was ground to −74 μm with a porcelain ball mill and then processed with a shaking table to remove the light mineral impurities such as calcite and silicate minerals. The heavy fraction containing primarily bastnäsite and barite was processed with a Frantz Isodynamic Separator at a magnetic field strength of 2.0 T to remove the remaining barite. The assay results showed that the purified bastnäsite sample contained 71.2% REO, 2.21% CaO, 0.82% SiO Research grade octyl hydroxamic acid (OHA) (obtained from Cytec, USA) was used as collector. Other chemicals of analytical grade were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Beijing Co., Ltd. Hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as pH regulators. Deionized water (resistivity 18.2 MΩ cm) was used in all experiments. Flotation experiments were carried out in an XFG flotation machine with a 40 mL plexiglass cell, at an impeller speed of 1800 rpm. In single mineral flotation experiments, 2.0 g bastnäsite or fluorite was dispersed in the cell with 40 mL distilled water. The pH of the mineral suspensions was adjusted by NaOH or HCl, and then OHA and EDTA (if needed) were added and conditioned for 2 min for each reagent, after that the pH was readjusted. The flotation lasted for 4 min. The recovery was calculated based on the dry mass percent of concentrate. In mixed minerals flotation, 3.0 g mixed minerals of bastnäsite and fluorite (mass ratio 1:1) were used. The other conditions were kept consistent with single mineral flotation experiments. All the concentrates and tailings were filtered, dried, weighed and assayed REO and CaF The selectivity index For REO content assay in mixed mineral flotation tests, 0.1 g of sample was mixed with sodium hydroxide and sodium peroxide in a crucible and then heated at 750 °C in a muffle furnace to form a homogeneous melt. The melt was digested in hydrochloric acid and then determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). The CaF CaF Zeta potential measurements were conducted at 20℃ using a Brookhaven ZetaPlus Analyzer (Brookhaven Corporation, USA). The bastnäsite or fluorite samples for zeta potential measurements were ground to d The bastnäsite and fluorite samples at different flotation conditions for XPS analysis were taken from the flotation cell. The solid particles were dried in a vacuum desiccator before XPS measurements. The XPS characterization of samples was carried out by a Kratos Axis 165 spectrometer with monochromatized Al KαX-rays (1486.6 eV). Survey (wide) scans were taken at a pass energy of 160 eV, and multiplex (narrow) high resolution scans were taken at 20 eV. Survey scans were carried out over the 1200–0 eV binding energy range with 1.0 eV steps and a dwell time of 100 ms. Narrow high-resolution scans were performed with 0.05 eV steps and 250 ms dwell time. All measurements were carried out at pressures below 10      To understand the action mechanism of EDTA on the separation of bastnäsite from fluorite, zeta potential and XPS were conducted to investigate the effect of EDTA on the electrical property and components present on bastnäsite and fluorite surfaces. Zeta potential is the electrical potential for the interfacial double layer at the location of the slipping plane relative to a point in the bulk solution away from the interface ( Isoelectric point (IEP), the pH value where the zeta potential is zero, is an important mineral property that can be used to characterize charging of the mineral surface (  Bastnäsite and fluorite conditioned without or with 8 × 10  On the OHA-treated bastnäsite, the N 1s peak was comprised of 75% chemically adsorbed (deprotonated) and 25% physically adsorbed (protonated) OHA, indicating that the majority of OHA were chemically adsorbed on bastnäsite, which is also the main adsorption form of hydroxamate collector on pyrochlore (  The above study indicates that fluorite was selectively depressed in bastnäsite flotation using EDTA. It is proposed that EDTA was able to transform the chemically adsorbed OHA, Ca-hydroxamate chelate (denoted as Ca-OHA) on fluorite, into the soluble Ca-EDTA complexes, whereas the Ce-OHA chelate on bastnäsite resulting from the adsorption of OHA was more stable and cannot be dissolved by EDTA. In this part, the theoretical thermodynamic calculation was adopted to verify whether Ca, Ce-OHA chelates can be converted to Ca, Ce-EDTA complexes by EDTA. The conversion reactions of Ce-OHA to Ce-EDTA and Ca-OHA to Ca-EDTA were expressed in Eq. The reaction equilibrium constants for Eq. The standard Gibbs free energy changes ( The relationship between Gibbs free energy changes ( As shown in The reactions occurring on fluorite and bastnäsite surfaces with the addition of OHA and EDTA is illustrated in In the current study, the effect of ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) as a depressant for fluorite in bastnäsite flotation was investigated through flotation, zeta potential and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) tests. The flotation results showed that fluorite was significantly depressed, while the flotation of bastnäsite was almost unaffected when EDTA was present. The separation index between bastnäsite and fluorite increased from 1.18 to 12.66 with the increase of EDTA concentration from 0 to 7.79 kg/t. The results of zeta potential and XPS tests, as well as theoretical thermodynamic calculation, showed that EDTA could dissolve the chemically adsorbed octyl hydroxamic acid (OHA) on fluorite through the formation of soluble Ca-EDTA complexes, whereas the chemically adsorbed OHA on bastnäsite was more stable and could not be transformed into Ce-EDTA spontaneously. As a result, the flotation of fluorite was selectively depressed by EDTA. The findings of this study showed that EDTA was a promising depressant for fluorite gangue mineral in the flotation of bastnäsite. The financial supports from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: