Drop size distribution and mean drop size are used for calculation of interfacial area available for mass transfer. In this study, the drop size distribution and Sauter mean drop diameter (d
                     32) have been investigated using three different liquid systems in the absence of mass transfer in a pilot plant pulsed packed column. The drop size was measured at four different points along the active column height. Three operating variables have been studied including the pulse intensity (af) and flow rates of both liquid phases. The effect of liquid properties and height of the active column were also investigated. A combination of the pulse intensity and interfacial tension had the largest effect on the drop size distribution while none of the flow rates were of significance. The height of the column played an important role at the bottom of the active column, but the associated effect was reduced with increase of the height. Finally, a normal probability function of number density was proposed for prediction of the drop size distribution with an Average Absolute Relative Error (AARE) of 8.8% for their optimized constant. Furthermore, two correlations were presented involving height or flow rates of the two phases along with operating variables and physical properties of the liquids. These correlations had AARE values of about 8.5 and 7.8%, respectively.pulse intensity (m/s) specific surface area (m Sauter mean diameter (m) arithmetic or number mean diameter (m) drop diameter (mm) acceleration due to gravity (=9.81 height at each point of active column (m) the overall height of active column (m) number of droplets of mean diameter probability of number density volumetric flow rate (m continuous phase dispersed phase normal probability density function log-normal probability density function constant parameter of probability of density function constant parameter of probability of density function void fraction viscosity (N density (kg/m density difference between two phases (kg/m interfacial tension between two phases (N/m) Liquid–liquid extraction is one of the useful techniques applied in various separation technologies including chemical, petroleum, food, hydrometallurgy, nuclear, and many other applications ( Pulse intensity can affect the drop size: the drop breakup is enhanced with increasing pulse intensity due to enhaced collisions between the dispersed liquid drops and the internal wall ( The volumetric flow rates of the continuous and dispersed phases also slightly change the drop size ( There are few works implemented on the pulsed packed columns, more specifically the drop size. In this work, the Sauter drop size and drop size distribution behavior have been explored in a pulsed packed extraction column. The effects of operating variables ( A glass pilot plant pulsed packed column with 1.4 Three liquid–liquid systems were selected to cover a wide range of interfacial tension values according to the recommendations of the European Federation of Chemical Engineering ( Drop sizes were determined by taking a digital photo of the column contents using a Nikon D5000 digital camera and comparing the drop dimensions with the known size of the packing as a reference. The drop size was measured at four hights of the active column ( To determine the size of the drops, the recorded photos were analyzed by AutoCAD software. More than 1500 drops were analyzed for each experimental condition at four points of the active column to guarantee the statistical significance of the determined Sauter mean drop diameter. The Sauter mean drop diameter, In an apparatus with an agitator, drops frequently run into eddies. The resulting collisions are responsible for the drops breakup into two or several smaller ones ( In this study, three operational parameters were examined including pulse intensity and volumetric flow rates of continuous and dispersed phases. For each liquid system, 18 experiments were carried out according to the central composite design method so that the parameters systematically varied in 15 experiments with o one of them (the center point) repeated four times in order to consider the accuracy of the system at hand. The error of the system thus determined was evaluated as about 5.6%. The minimum levels of The effect of continuous phase flow rates at the same pulse intensities has been illustrated in Another parameter that influences the drop size distribution is the height of active column. In the first 20 The collision energy and turbulence of the system are increased with increasing the pulse intensity, as a result of which, the eddies of the liquid stream become smaller. The smaller eddies lead to breakup of the drops whereas the larger ones carry the drops ( In order to find a suitable correlation, two models of distribution functions, namely the normal and log-normal probability density functions were tested for reproduction of the experimental data. Here the probability density has been considered as a number density defined as the ratio of number of drops of a specific diameter ( The two fitted parameters are given in terms of the following dimensionless numbers: The acceleration of gravity is constant, and the density and viscosity of the continuous phase are almost constant in all of the equations presented here. The main variations of the first and the second numbers in these correlations are then to be related to the pulse intensity and the interfacial tension, respectively. These indicate that a combination of the two variables in Eqs. By the use of probability of number density, it is possible to calculate all forms of mean drop size such as the Sauter mean diameter ( This equation is able to predict When there is no pulse or low pulse intensity, ratio of buoyancy to interfacial tension forces is responsible for the breakup of the drops and formation of the smaller drops. Thus, the drop size can be predicted by the following equation: The AARE for this equation is about 19.88% as shown in This equation is used for the calculation of the drop size distribution. Here the local height is important as apparent form the power of the third number, especially that the fraction inside the third number is lower than unity. With increasing the height of the column, this number tends to 1, indicating that the effect of the column height on the drop size reduces with increase of the height. It also means that the drop size will be reduced from bottom to top of the active column as a result of a decreased importance of the height effect. The AARE for the correlations As understood from This paper presented an experimental study of the Sauter mean drop size in a pulsed packed extraction column. The observations revealed that the Sauter diameter is decreased, and the distribution curve of the drop size is sharpened with an increase in the pulse intensity. The volumetric flow rates of the dispersed and continuous phases were found to have almost no significant effect; their effects were, then, ignored as compared to the effect of the column height. At upstream, the height of the active column has an obvious influence on the drop size due to the higher energies of collision between drops and packing walls in comparison with that of the interfacial tension, but the effect is reduced at the top of the column. Another main parameter was the interfacial tension. An increase in the interfacial tension intensifies the tension energy against the collision and shear energies, as a consequence of which, the drop size will increase. A number of correlations have also been proposed as functions of operating conditions, physical properties of the liquid systems, ratio of the volumetric flow rates, and the column height, ensuring that the presented distribution functions can predict the drop size distribution at every point of the active column. All correlations are in good agreement with the experimental data, with their AARE ranging from about 7.8 to 12%.