The use of activated carbon and ion-exchange resins for recovering copper cyanide from gold leach solutions is compared in detail. When using activated carbon, the overall cyanide-to-copper ratio should be reduced to ∼2 to achieve the most effective adsorption. This can be accomplished by dissolving metallic copper into the leach solution. However when using ion-exchange resins to recover the copper, it is not necessary to reduce the overall cyanide-to-copper ratio as the Cu(CN)3
                     2− complex, which is most prevalent in leach solutions, can strongly adsorb onto the resin. Whilst the elution of copper from carbon is relatively simple, the elution of copper from the resins is challenging. Among a variety of elution systems investigated, a cyanide soak followed by NaCl elution appears to be the most elegant, with the advantage of no regeneration of the eluted resin being needed. Two closed loop elution flowsheets have been investigated to recover copper from ion-exchange resin, with each having a different impact on the removal of thiocyanate from the leach solution by the resin.Cyanidation is the dominant process used for recovering gold from its ores. In recovering gold from copper-containing gold ores by cyanidation, some copper minerals are also dissolved by cyanide to form copper cyanide complexes. This can have a detrimental effect on the process efficiency and economics due to high cyanide consumption, reduced gold leach rates and poor gold recovery ( Due to the remaining issues with the current copper recovery/recycle processes, there is an opportunity to develop a new process that allows for the ease of gold recovery from copper-containing gold ores in which the copper is subsequently recovered and cyanide recycled. A schematic flowsheet of the general concept is shown in To avoid treating the entire cyanidation tailings stream, concentration to a clarified solution using ion-exchange resins or activated carbon was considered vital to the development of a potentially successful process. To recover cyanide as well as copper cyanide, an additional step is required to complex the cyanide, e.g. by the dissolution of metallic copper. If using activated carbon it is important to dissolve sufficient copper to convert Cu(CN) The use of ion-exchange resins to recover metal cyanide complexes has received considerable attention in recent times due to their strong affinity for metal cyanide complexes ( This paper describes the development of a resin elution method to accommodate the need of copper cyanide recovery in the proposed flowsheet ( All experiments were carried out using fresh solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and deionised water. Unless stated otherwise, experiments were conducted at pH 10.5 and ambient temperature. Copper cyanide loading solutions of various concentrations and cyanide-to-copper ratios were prepared by dissolving copper cyanide powder (CuCN) in a cyanide solution, with pH adjusted to 10.5 using sodium hydroxide. For carbon adsorption, new carbon (Kuraray QA6/12HAH) was screened (+ For the resin adsorption kinetics study, 200 For column resin elution experiments, 8 Sodium acetate was analysed by HPLC using an anion-exchange column and UV detection.  The effect of cyanide-to-copper ratio on the kinetics of copper adsorption onto a strong base ion-exchange resin has been investigated and the results are shown in The pseudo-equilibrium loading (24-hour loading) of copper on carbon has been studied previously, and it has been established that the copper cyanide loading significantly decreases with increasing cyanide-to-copper ratio ( As a low cyanide-to-copper ratio is preferred to facilitate the recovery of copper, the effect of cyanide-to-copper ratio on the concurrent recovery of silver has been investigated. As shown in Shown in The effect of cyanide-to-copper ratio on the equilibrium loading of copper onto a strong base ion-exchange resin has been investigated and the results are shown in Apart from other trace metal cyanide species, anionic species that can compete with copper cyanide are thiocyanate (a product from the cyanidation of ore containing sulfide minerals), and chloride (processes using saline water). Therefore the equilibrium between copper cyanide and these species was investigated using a typical leach tails solution composition (3 A loading experiment was also conducted with ∼ The performance of various types of resins in recovering copper cyanide and their corresponding As a summary of the discussion above, The elution of copper cyanides from activated carbon has been previously investigated, with the results indicating that satisfactory elution can be obtained by pre-soaking the loaded carbon with high cyanide + The batch elution results for various elution systems investigated for copper cyanide loaded strong base ion-exchange resin are summarised in The experiments carried out using some common organic acid salts (acetate, benzoate, succinate and phthalate) include both mono-valent and di-valent organic ions with and without a benzenoid structure. There are some potential benefits of using these species: 1) they are pH buffers in the range in which the subsequent copper electrowinning can be carried out (∼  Ammonium thiosulfate eluant buffered at pH 5 by acetate was found to effectively elute copper cyanide off the resin ( It is clear from Due to the competitive adsorption between copper cyanide and thiocyanate ( Also shown in In batch elution tests the high copper concentration in the eluant may hinder the elution performance due to the equilibrium of copper between liquid and resin phases. Therefore, column elution was carried out to further investigate the chloride system as this equilibrium can be exploited in a column elution to achieve better elution efficiency. To encourage the conversion of the copper cyanide on resin to Cu(CN) Thiocyanate is commonly found in leach tail solutions where the ore contains sulfide minerals. Due to its strong affinity towards ion-exchange resins, it is important to understand the behaviour of thiocyanate during the copper elution process. Resin pre-loaded with copper and thiocyanate was thus eluted using the method developed in Due to the equilibrium between copper cyanide and thiocyanate, the eluted resin, containing chloride and partially loaded with thiocyanate, still has the ability to recover copper. Experiments were thus carried out to simulate the steady state of a closed loop resin recovery process. Two flowsheets were tested, one with very limited thiocyanate removal from the leach solution and another with some thiocyanate removal. To simulate the closed loop operation at steady state, a mass balance was carried out on each flowsheet to estimate the accumulation of thiocyanate in the eluant streams. This was then taken as the feed thiocyanate concentration for elution.   Due to the purge of the first two bed volumes, more sodium chloride will be lost, together with thiocyanate, unless it is otherwise recovered by further processing. To minimise the loss of sodium chloride, different pre-soak and elution conditions were investigated with the results also shown in Preliminary electrochemical studies have indicated that it is feasible to electrowin copper from either the thiocyanate or chloride eluate at pH 5, and work is currently being conducted to thoroughly investigate the electrowinning of copper from these eluates. When low pH electrowinning is used to recover the copper, the cyanide can also be simultaneously recovered using a hydrophobic hollow fibre membrane contactor ( It has been found that the adsorption of copper cyanide onto activated carbon follows a first order reaction initially, but deviates from it due to the change in adsorption mechanism from film diffusion controlled to surface diffusion controlled adsorption. In comparison the adsorption of copper cyanide onto strong base ion-exchange resins follows a first order reaction with much faster overall adsorption kinetics. Carbon adsorption of copper cyanide decreases significantly as the cyanide-to-copper ratio increases, whilst the cyanide-to-copper ratio has little effect on the recovery of copper cyanides with strong base ion-exchange resins. The presence of cations, particularly Ca The elution of copper cyanide from activated carbon is a relatively easy process involving a cyanide soak and water wash. Acetate, a potential pH buffer for the electrowinning of copper from the copper cyanide eluate, has been found to have little effect on the elution of copper from carbon. The elution of copper from strong base resins, on the other hand, is a lot more challenging. Therefore, a range of eluants have been investigated for resin elution, with all the organic eluants investigated showing poor elution behaviour. Among the inorganic eluants investigated, ammonium thiosulfate with pH buffered at 5, and thiocyanate gave the best batch elution results. These two elution systems, however, have their own potential problems. This resin elution work has thus focused on the chloride based eluants, as the eluted resin does not require regeneration and the accumulation of chloride in the water circuit is less of an issue than other anions. The mechanisms of copper cyanide elution with NaCl include: 1) the conversion of copper cyanide species to Cu(CN) The support of the