We report on the effectiveness of a two-stage sequential integrated bioleaching process for enhanced recovery of metals from decoked spent petroleum catalyst. Fourier transform-infrared spectra confirmed that decoking led to removal of entrained hydrocarbons and carbonaceous deposits from the raw spent catalyst. Several two-stage sequential leaching strategies (two-stage bioleaching, two-stage abiotic leaching, bioleaching followed by alkali leaching, alkali leaching followed by acid leaching, and two-stage alkali leaching) were evaluated in batch reactors. The results suggested that two-stage bioleaching (240h) with Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans was the most effective strategy to recover Ni (79%) and V (90%). Whereas integrating bioleaching with alkaline leaching remarkably improved leaching yield of Mo (88%) in a shorter period of time (125h). A mineral liberation analysis of the treated residue also confirmed that most of the Mo was leach out during second stage alkali leaching.The petroleum refinery industry generates significant quantities of spent catalyst as a waste product and this has increased in recent years due to the rise in demand for petroleum products, lower quality refinery feedstock, and regulations limiting the sulfur content of fuels. At the current rate of consumption approximately 178,000 Various attempts have been made to remove these metals by conventional hydrometallurgical processes that have employed strong acid (8 Biohydrometallurgical processes involving the use of mesophilic chemoautotrophic bacteria ( It has also been reported that Mo yield during bioleaching is generally low in a single-stage treatment step due to the limited solubility of Mo oxoanions in a weakly acidic solution, the refractory nature of MoS In the present study, several two-stage sequential leaching strategies were tested in order to test their effectiveness in achieving high metal leaching yield from the decoked spent catalyst. These were (1) bioleaching followed by bioleaching, (2) bioleaching followed by alkali leaching, (3) alkali leaching followed by acid leaching, and (4) alkali leaching followed by alkali leaching. The spent catalyst was procured from a petroleum refinery company located in South Korea. The raw spent catalyst was oily and had carbonaceous deposits. It was decoked by heating in a furnace at 500 The carbon content of the spent catalyst was determined with a LECO CS-600 analyzer. The carbon content of the decoked spent catalyst (1.48%) was significantly less than that of coked (raw) spent catalyst (22.80%). The particle size distribution of the spent catalyst samples was determined using the laser diffraction method with a British Malvern Mastersizer 2000. The particle size range of the feed decoked sample was 0.025–125 The X-ray diffractogram (XRD) of the decoked spent catalyst was obtained using Cu Kα radiation from an X-ray diffractometer (Smartlab, Rigaku, Japan) operated in Bragg–Brentano geometry with counting time of 3 The FT-IR technique was used to characterize the organic functional groups of the raw and decoked spent catalyst. We provide a detailed surface characterization emphasizing the type and changes in different organic functional groups during the decoking process such as aromatic carbon, unsaturated hydrocarbons (C Elemental mapping of the decoked and treated samples was carried out with a mineral liberation analyzer (MLA650F, FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA). Very stable back scattered electron signals from the scanning electron microscope SEM were used to generate quality images. The ground samples were set in epoxy resin in a round mold to form a hardened block, a cross section of which was polished and coated with carbon before being presented to the analyzer.  Various two-stage sequential leaching procedures (i.e. two-stage bioleaching, abiotic (control) leaching followed by abiotic leaching, alkali leaching followed by acid leaching, alkali leaching followed by alkali leaching and bioleaching followed by alkali leaching) were performed in separate 2.5 Experiments were conducted in 500 Leaching experiments were carried out by adding 1% (w/v) decoked spent catalyst to a batch reactor (working volume of 1 Experiments were conducted to determine the optimum acidic pH prior to acid leaching and bioleaching. Experiments were carried out by adding 1% (w/v) decoked spent catalyst to sulfuric acid solutions in 500 Two-stage bioleaching was performed using In a control reactor (without bacteria) under the same operating conditions at pH Another strategy employed was using first-stage bioleaching of decoked spent catalyst followed by second-stage of alkali leaching. In these experiments, the bioleached residue obtained after first stage bioleaching (second part of the residue obtained in In all experiments, water lost due to evaporation was compensated for by adding deionized water. All samples were analyzed in triplicate for metal leaching and varied within ± Data obtained from the FT-IR study showed clear differences between the raw and decoked spent catalyst ( The percentage leaching of Mo and V ( The percentage leaching of Mo and V ( The chemical reactions for the leaching were assumed to be: The higher leaching yields of Mo and V can be explained based on the Eh–pH diagram ( The solubilization of Al was found to be low compared to Mo and V. This is due to the form in which Al is present in the spent catalyst. The spent catalyst used had an Al A lower Ni yield during alkali leaching of spent sulfuric acid catalyst has been reported ( The residue obtained after the first alkali leach at pH First-stage alkali leaching was performed as described above. At the end of 5 The treated residue obtained after first-stage alkali leaching was subjected to second-stage acid leaching conducted at pH The treated residue obtained after first-stage alkali leaching was subjected to second-stage acid leaching conducted at pH During second-stage acid leaching, the yield of V increased by 17% ( Acid leaching was the most effective for leaching of Ni. About 54% of Ni was leached at the end of second-stage acid leaching compared to 0% after the first stage. The higher leaching of Ni during the second stage may be due to the formation of acid soluble nickel species such as (Ni The leaching yields of Ni, Al, Mo, and V after two-stages of bioleaching (at pH The higher yield of Ni and V in the current investigation was explained through the use of Eh–pH diagrams ( In the first-stage control leaching the leaching yields of Ni (42%), Mo (44%), Al (7%), and V (23%) in the first 20 The leaching yield of V increased significantly during second-stage bioleaching (by 15%), whereas only an 8% increase was observed during control leaching. For Ni (4–5%), Al (5–8%) and Mo (6–8%) similar increases in yield were observed during both second-stage bioleaching and control leaching. The leaching yields after two-stage bioleaching (79% Ni, 39% Al, 76% Mo and 90% V) were significantly higher than those after two-stage control leaching (51% Ni, 13% Al, 56% Mo and 33% V). These results suggest that two-stage bioleaching was more effective for leaching the metals from spent catalyst compared to that in the control. The dissolution of metals was rapid in the first 20  During second-stage bioleaching and control leaching, the increases in pH (1.0 and 2.6) were lower than that observed during the first stage ( The reaction between metal oxides and protons in the spent catalyst can be written as follows: As indicated by the Eh–pH diagrams ( As expected, alkaline leaching improved overall Mo extraction ( The results of the present study strongly suggested that incorporation of a second-stage sequential leaching step significantly enhanced the dissolution of metals from decoked spent catalyst. Second-stage leaching (bioleaching, alkaline, acid and control) experiments were conducted under conditions similar to those of the first-stage treatment. The enhancement of metal leaching yields during the second stage may have been due to significant concentrations of metals being leached into the solution during first-stage treatment to saturation; hence, no further increase in yield was observed. Fresh lixiviants were present for the second-stage, which further reacted with the metal oxides remaining in the residue. The elemental mapping of the feed decoked spent catalyst, first-stage bioleached residue, residue obtained after second-stage bioleaching, and residue obtained after bioleaching followed by second-stage alkali leaching has been provided as S3A, S3B, S3C and S3D, respectively in the supplementary information. Elemental mapping and chemical compositions of decoked spent catalyst revealed the presence of Al, O and S, Mo, and V as major elements (S3A). Ni was present as a minor element due to its low concentration in the spent catalyst as also evidenced by the ICP analysis. The MLA results confirmed the XRD analysis that the matrix is made up of aluminum oxides and sulfides (Al The effectiveness of a two-stage integrated bioleaching process for enhanced recovery of metals from decoked spent petroleum refinery catalyst has been reported. Decoking caused the removal of entrained hydrocarbons and carbonaceous deposits from coked spent catalyst. XRD results confirmed that metals were mostly present as their oxides and sulfides in the decoked spent catalyst sample. The leaching results indicated that bioleaching was more efficient than abiotic leaching. Moreover, the leaching yields of metals can be further enhanced by employing a second-stage of bioleaching, acid leaching or alkali leaching. The maximum leaching yield of Mo (88%) was achieved by employing bioleaching followed by alkali leaching, and about 90% V and 75% Ni were also leached from the decoked spent catalyst. Two-stage bioleaching caused higher dissolution of Ni (79%) and V (90%) with a slightly lower yield of Mo (76%). Two-stage alkali leaching yielded high Mo (88%) and V (82%); however, the leaching yield of Ni (1%) was significantly less. Two-stage bioleaching is an ideal strategy for a higher leaching yield of Ni and V, whereas integrating bioleaching with alkali leaching improved the leaching yield of Mo. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This study was supported by the Leading Foreign Research Institute Recruitment Program through the