Mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore is becoming the major source of nickel produced in the nickel smelting enterprise due to the increasing global demand of nickel and the depletion of high-grade nickel sulfide ore. Low temperature roasting technique by ammonium sulfate is a potential cleaner production process with high metal recovery, high reaction selectivity and low energy consumption. In this work, Chinese mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ores were roasted by ammonium sulfate at low temperatures of 300–500 °C to extract valuable metals directly and synchronously. Some influence factors including roasting temperature, ammonium-to-ore mole ratio, roasting time and particle size of the ore samples were studied in the roasting process. Sodium sulfate was added to improve the extraction of nickel by converting into Na-pyrosulfate. The results showed that more than 97% Cu, 97% Ni and 82% Fe are extracted, under the conditions of roasting temperature 450 °C, roasting time 4 h, ammonium-to-ore mole ratio 2.2:1, particle size −160 + 180 mesh, sodium sulfate dosage 3 g. The evolution behavior and mechanism of various minerals were elucidated using X-ray Diffraction, Thermogravimetric Analysis, Differential Thermal Analysis, Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy Dispersive Spectrometer. It is found that pyrite (FeS2), pyrrhotite (Fe7S8), pentlandite ((Fe,Ni)9S8) and chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) can react sufficiently with ammonium sulfate to form the corresponding metallic ammonium sulfate salts. Ammonium ferric sulfate can be decomposed to produce insoluble iron oxide by increasing the roasting temperature to higher than 500 °C to realize the separation from copper and nickel in the leaching liquid. The ammonium sulfate roasting-water leaching technique provides an effective approach for the extraction of nickel and copper from Chinese low grade mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ores.As an important strategic metal, nickel is mainly used in the production of stainless steel and nonferrous alloys due to its high impact strength and ductility properties ( Mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore is a thick mixed ore belt located between the primary sulfide nickel ore lean ore and upper oxidized ore belt, accounting for approximately 2/3 of total Chinese nickel reserves. Several typical characteristics of mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore are different from those of traditional sulfide nickel ore, namely, low metal content, high alkali gangue content, complex chemical compositions and mineral structures. The content of metallic minerals including pyrite, pyrrhotite, pentlandite, violarite, chalcopyrite is lower than 10% of the total minerals, while gangue minerals, mainly containing serpentine, chlorite, talc, olivine and other silicate minerals, account for over 90%. Valuable metals of nickel and copper are dispersed in different minerals such as sulfide ore, oxide ore and silicate gangue, which causes the minerals to show different structure and properties. When mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore is treated by the existing process for high-grade nickel sulfide ore, approximately half of the non-ferrous metals including nickel, copper and platinum group metals are lost ( Research on the metallurgical technologies of mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore has been somewhat rare, with only a small amount of published experimental data regarding the direct extraction of valuable metals by bioleaching. Heap bioleaching ( The technique of low-temperature roasting with ammonium sulfate has been regarded as a promising and cleaner process for direct extraction of valuable metals from low-grade laterite ores ( In this study, ammonium sulfate roasting technique was used to process a typical Chinese mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore to extract copper and nickel directly in a relatively low temperature range (300–500 °C) under the condition of inletting oxygen gas. The reaction system of valuable metal sulfide mineral phases and ammonium sulfate is novel, and no relevant report is available until now. The gas of SO The mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore used in this study was taken from Xinjiang province, China. The ore samples were ground and sieved into six narrow size fractions: +120, −120 + 140, −140 + 160, −160 + 180, −180 + 200 and −200 mesh. Unless otherwise stated, roasting experiments were performed with the −160 + 180 mesh. The chemical compositions of each size fraction are shown in The mineralogical phase identification of the ore samples was carried out using XRD (Rint-2000, Rigaku), and the results in The roasting experiments were conducted at the laboratory scale (10 g). After being dried at 80 °C for 12 h, the ore samples were mixed equably with a calculated amount of ammonium sulfate, the mixture was loaded in a ceramic crucible and heated in a vertical tube furnace controlled using a programmable temperature controller with the precision of ±1 °C. Oxygen gas was introduced from the bottom of tube, and the gas generated during the roasting process was absorbed by water in a bottle connected from the top of tube. The roasting temperature was set at the desired values ranging from 300 to 500 °C, at an interval of 50 °C. After reaching the predetermined temperature, the mixture would be maintained at this temperature for a period of time. After cooling to room temperature, the roasted samples were leached with purified water at 80 °C for 40 min under the solid/liquid ratio of 1:4 g/mL and the stirring speed of 450 r/min, where the sulfate salts formed in the roasting process were dissolved into water. Filtration was conducted to collect the liquid samples for measuring the concentration of the main metal ions in order to calculate their extractions according to Eq. The influence of the roasting temperature on the extractions of nickel, copper and iron was studied from 300 to 500 °C based on the ammonium sulfate properties. The experiments were carried out under the condition of ammonium-to-ore mole ratio of 2.2:1 and roasting time of 4 h.  The ore samples were mixed evenly with ammonium sulfate according to different mole ratios varying from 1.4:1 to 2.4:1, and were roasted at 450 °C for 4 h in order to investigate the effect of the ammonium-to-ore mole ratio on the extractions of nickel, copper and iron. The results are presented in To investigate the effect of the roasting time on the extractions of nickel, copper and iron, the time was varied from 1 to 5 h, while keeping the roasting temperature at 450 °C and the ammonium-to-ore mole ratio at 2.2:1, the results are given in It is observed that the curves for the extractions of metals are similar, the extractions increase with the increase of roasting time, and extractions of 89.16% Ni, 97.99% Cu and 82.29% Fe are obtained when the roasting time is 5 h. The results suggest that the roasting time of 4 h is sufficient to obtain over 88% Ni and 97% Cu. Compared with the biological leaching ( A series of experiments were carried out to determine the metal extractions at six different size fractions under the conditions of roasting temperature 450 °C, roasting time 4 h and ammonium-to-ore mole ratio 2.2:1. As shown in By increasing the mesh, ore samples with a smaller particle size and a larger specific surface area can be obtained to increase the contact area between the ore samples and the reaction reagent, resulting in the improvement of the reaction rate. Ultrafine particles are unfavorable for mass transfer in the roasting process due to the agglomeration of fine particles. Given that ultrafine particles are difficult to obtain because of the technical limit and economic reasons ( To identify the roasting mechanism of mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore and the transformation behavior of various minerals, the TG/DTA of the mixed samples of ores and ammonium sulfate was performed from 0 to 1000 °C at the heating rate of 10 °C/min, and the results are presented in From the DTA curve shown in The first endothermic peak at 275 °C is mainly attributed to the deamination reaction of ammonium sulfate and the formation of few metallic ammonium sulfate salts. The second endothermic peak at 370 °C is caused by a rapid deamination reaction of ammonium sulfate and the production of metallic ammonium sulfate salts in larger quantities. Both the deamination of ammonium sulfate and the generation of metallic ammonium sulfate salts occur simultaneously and continuously, giving rise to a large weight loss of approximately 14.4%. The third endothermic peak at 540 °C is assigned to the rapid decomposition of ammonium ferric sulfate, corresponding to the obvious weight loss of approximately 1.1%. The XRD analysis of clinkers obtained by roasting ore samples with ammonium sulfate at the temperatures of three endothermic peaks on the DTA curve was conducted to reveal the crystalline phase transformation, and the results are shown in In contrast to the XRD diagram of the raw ore ( The combination of TG/DTA and XRD results shows that the chemical reactions occurring during the roasting process of the ore samples with ammonium sulfate include the decomposition of ammonium sulfate, the reaction between the various ore minerals and ammonium sulfate and the decomposition of ammonium ferric sulfate. The total decomposition of ammonium sulfate can be expressed as: In the ammonium sulfate roasting process of mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore, the transformation course of various ore minerals can be expressed as: various ore minerals→metal oxides →ammonium metal sulfates. The total chemical reactions between various ore minerals and ammonium sulfate can be written as follows: Ammonium ferric sulfate can be decomposed further to produce iron oxide, the transformation course can be expressed as ammonium ferric sulfate→ferric sulfate→iron oxide. The decomposition of ammonium ferric sulfate is carried out step by step according to Eqs. Based on the different properties of ammonium sulfates of iron, nickel and copper, the roasting clinkers obtained under the above roasting conditions can be heated further in the temperature range of 500–700 °C to convert ammonium ferric sulfate into insoluble iron oxide ( The particle morphology and surface composition of raw ores, clinkers and leach residue were analyzed using SEM and EDS (Leo Supra 35, Germany), the results are presented in After water leaching, the solid residues exhibit two different microscopic morphologies in Due to its catalysis action ( The clinkers obtained at different roasting conditions, without sodium sulfate and with the addition of 3 g sodium sulfate, were analyzed by SEM, and the surface morphology of the particles was presented in Roasting with ammonium sulfate and water leaching can be employed to extract valuable metals directly from low grade mixed oxide-sulfide nickel ore. The results of mineralogical studies indicated that the major crystalline minerals present in the ore are pyrite, pyrrhotite, pentlandite, chalcopyrite and quartz. Compared with other factors, roasting temperature and particle size of the ore have greater effect on the extractions of metal. Under the conditions of roasting temperature 450 °C, roasting time 4 h, ammonium-to-ore mole ratio 2.2:1 and particle size −160 + 180 mesh, extractions of 88.88% Ni, 97.63% Cu and 82.04% Fe were achieved. Nickel extraction was effectively improved to more than 97% by adding 3 g sodium sulfate in the roasting process. Evolution behavior of various mineral phases illustrated by XRD, TG/DTA, SEM and EDS can be expressed as: various ore minerals→metal oxides →ammonium metal sulfates. Ammonium ferric sulfate can be decomposed to produce insoluble iron oxide by increasing the roasting temperature to higher than 500 °C, the transformation course can be expressed as: ammonium ferric sulfate→ferric sulfate→iron oxide. Further works on the separation process of nickel and copper in the leaching liquid are required. The off gas released in the roasting process can be recovered in the form of ammonium sulfate crystals for recycling to achieve cleaner production. The roasting temperature of 450 °C is much lower than that used in traditional pyrometallurgical technology, providing significant energy saving for this process. The authors acknowledge financial support from the