This research covers a different microstructural and electrochemical investigation on hydroxyapatite (HAP) coatings deposited on AZ31 magnesium alloy. Microstructure characterization and functional group identification were performed using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. The prepared samples were immersed in simulated body fluid to study the degradation behavior of AZ31 and the amount of hydrogen produced. Electrochemical techniques were employed to evaluate and compare the corrosion behavior of the nano-HAP (n-HAP) coated and uncoated samples. The changes in pH value during the corrosion process were also measured. Results suggest the noticeable capability of n-HAP coatings to stabilize the alkalization behavior and to improve the corrosion resistance of AZ31 alloy. Consequently, the hydrogen evolution process beneath the n-HAP coating decreased significantly. It was concluded that an n-HAP coated AZ31 alloy could be a good candidate as a type of biodegradable implant material for biomedical applications.Today, titanium alloys and stainless steels are widely used in implant devices In order to evaluate the corrosion of Mg and its alloys, many evaluation methods may be needed to measure parameters such as mass loss rate, Mg Hydroxyapatite coatings are frequently used to increase the bio-compatibility of implants. Many techniques are used to apply HAP coatings on metallic implants including but not limited to sol–gel deposition Later the thermal behavior of electrodeposited HAP coating on a titanium alloy was investigated by Drevet et al. in optimizing the heat treatment conditions for this prosthetic material. They reported the heat treatment temperature for the electrodeposited coating on a Ti Also, Wang et al. demonstrated that using electrodeposition, a compact fluoridated hydroxyapatite (FHA) coating can be achieved. The resultant FHA coatings showed higher bonding strength and lower dissolution rates than HA coatings Bakhsheshi et al. fabricated nanocrystalline fluorine-doped hydroxyapatite with the help of the electrodeposition method. The results of the study revealed that the FHA and the nanocalcium deficient HAP coatings can accelerate the formation of bone-like apatite layer and significantly decrease the dissolution rate as compared to the uncoated Mg alloy. The FHA coating provides effective protection to Mg alloy and contributes to the highest corrosion resistance The objective of this study is to control the degradation rate and hydrogen evolution of AZ31 Mg alloys by using a modified nanostructure coating that can be achieved through controlling the electrodeposition parameters. AZ31 Mg alloy sheets with elemental composition (wt.%) of 96.3% Mg, 2.8% Al, and 0.9% Zn were cut into rectangular specimens with dimensions of 15 The electrolyte for deposition of HAP was prepared by mixing a solution of 0.042 The morphology of the coating was studied by a high resolution scanning electron microscope (FESEM model Hitachi SU 8040, 40 The broadening of the peaks in XRD patterns can be used to estimate the crystallite size in a direction perpendicular to the crystallographic plane, based on the Scherrer formula as in Eq. To recognize the chemical bonding of the coatings (scratched from the surface), Fourier transform infrared spectra were recorded using a Nicolet 100 FT-IR spectrophotometer over the range of 4000 to 400 The adhesion strength of the coated AZ31 Mg alloy samples was assessed by a pull-out test according to American Society for Testing Materials (ASTM) international standard F1147. This test method covers tension testing of calcium phosphate and metallic porous coatings adhering to dense metal substrates at ambient temperatures. It assesses the degree of adhesion of coatings to substrates, or the internal cohesion of a coating in tension normal to the surface plane. A three-electrode corrosion cell was used for electrochemical measurements. The electrodes were the same as the electrodes mentioned above. The exposed area of the working electrode (AZ31 alloy coated with HAP) to the solution was 1 Another group of specimens was employed to evaluate their degradation rate in SBF solution. The weight of the specimens was measured by a digital balance with an accuracy of 10  The concentration of Mg The surface morphology and cross sectional structure of the constant and pulsed voltage cathodic electrodeposition coatings are shown in  The calculated fraction of crystallinity is 94% for n-HAP coating and 83% for CVE-HAP coating. Some researchers believe that higher crystallinity causes higher biological response  The deposition of HAP is expressed by the following reactions in pH above 4.8 (in H Reaction HAP is the most stable phase of calcium phosphate in pH above 4.8 and the rate of biodegradation of HAP is lower than that of other phases of calcium phosphate like DCPD Representative FT-IR spectra of as deposited HAP coatings on AZ31 Mg alloy are shown in Adhesion of the HAP coating to the substrate is very important for the implant to function properly under physiological conditions. The average measured adhesive strength for the n-HAP is 16.5 The results of EIS measurements are represented as Nyquist plots in The solution resistance ( The changes in concentration of Mg According to some research results the density of living cells decreases as the pH of the medium increases A thin layer of Mg(OH) On the one hand, the presence of OH  To summarize, the discussed results suggest that coating the surface of AZ31 alloy with a layer of n-HAP could control its degradation. Results of the amount of hydrogen evolution are shown in HAP coatings were formed on AZ31 Mg alloy by pulsed and constant voltage electrodeposition. The results show that by pulse electrodeposition method, a uniform, intertwined, dense and nano-structured HAP coating is formed on AZ31 Mg alloy. Moreover, XRD patterns and FTIR spectroscopy indicated that the formation of DCPD can be prevented by using pulsed electrodeposition method. The n-HAP coating significantly affects the corrosion behavior in simulated body fluid and the releasing rate of Mg The authors would like to recognize financial support from the