In this study, a series of one-dimensional coupled static and dynamic loading tests were performed by using a modified split Hopkinson pressure bar. Intact prismatic sandstone specimens and specimens with a prefabricated internal circular cavity were tested. The results show that, the dynamic strength of intact specimens and specimens with a cavity decreases with the increase of axial static pressure under 20–70% of the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS). However, the combined dynamic-static strength of intact specimens and specimens with a cavity increases slightly with the increase of the axial static pressure. Besides, the total strain of specimens under coupled axial static and dynamic loads is approximately a fixed value (about 1.16%). Under a low axial static pressure (20–40% of UCS), dynamic load plays a major role in rock failure, resulting in tensile splitting failure in intact specimen; under a medium axial static pressure (60% of UCS), both of static and dynamic loads play a major role in rock failure, resulting in a composite tensile-shear failure in intact specimen; under a high axial static pressure (70% of UCS), static load plays a major role in rock failure where shear failure occurs in intact specimens. However, for the specimen with an internal cavity, no matter how large the axial static pressure is, X-shaped shear failure occurs under the combined axial static and dynamic loads.cross-sectional area of elastic bar cross-sectional area of specimen height of specimen length of specimen dynamic pressure static pressure thickness of specimen duration of the stress wave width of specimen dynamic peak strain static strain total strain axial static stress combined static-dynamic strength dynamic strength incident stress at reflection stress at transmission stress at wave impedance of the elastic bar digital image correlation uniaxial compressive strength In the stope of underground mines, ore pillars sustain the entire loads which are transmitted by rocks in the upper goaf, and protect the safe mining of personnel and machinery in the stope. Therefore, the stability of ore pillars is closely related to mining safety. Besides, because of the high static pressure of the upper rock mass, pillars are also subject to dynamic loads, such as explosives blasting and mechanical rock drilling, which can be attributed to the combined problem of one-dimensional static and dynamic loads. In recent years, a large amount of differences in deep mining engineering has been observed between the rock mechanics phenomena and the traditional rock statics or dynamic behavior Although many studies have analyzed the mechanical behavior of rocks under the high ground stress or dynamic load through statics or dynamics tests The rupture and instability of the rock usually begin with original defects in the rock, such as initial cracks and holes. When cracks start to fracture, expand and interpenetrate around initial defects, it leads to the rupture of the rock mass, which is an important manifestation of the destruction of brittle rock. To this end, many scholars have carried out a large number of theoretical, experimental and numerical simulation studies on the crack propagation characteristics of prefabricated and fissured rock specimens. Taking studies of rocks with prefabricated defects as examples, Tang et al. Based on the above understanding, two issues were integrated in this paper, namely coupled axial static and dynamic loads, and the rock with a cavity. A one-dimensional coupled static and dynamic loading test system based on SHPB, an ultra-dynamic strain gauge and a high-speed camera were used in this study. The research on the specimen with a cavity and the intact rock which were subjected to one-dimensional coupled static and dynamic loads was carried out in this paper. Green sandstone from Longchang County, Sichuan Province, China was adopted as the specimen. The Young’s modulus of the specimen is 16.68 GPa; density is 2377.71 kg/m In the following text, A, B, C, D, E represent 20%, 30%, 40%, 60%, 70% of UCS. A-int-1 represents the first specimen of intact specimens under 20% of UCS axial static pressure. B-cavity-2 represents the second specimen of specimens with a cavity under 30% of UCS axial static pressure. The experimental apparatus of modified Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) was adopted in this test. As shown in Li et al. The stress waves of specimen A-int-2 are shown in Considering the test results of static load compression, the coupled static and dynamic loading test adopts five series of axial static pressure. The strength and the dynamic stress-strain curve of specimens under coupled axial static and dynamic loads can be obtained by combining Eqs. The typical dynamic stress-strain relationship of the specimen can be obtained through the signal transformation, as shown in From the above figures, it can be seen that, it is different from the general static stress-strain curve, and the compacted stage is not involved in the dynamic stress-strain curve under coupled static and dynamic loads. The curve starts at elasticity stage. Due to the axial pre-static pressure acting on the specimen before the dynamic pressure, it causes the compaction of the micro-fissures inside the specimen. These curves consist of 3 stages, namely the elastic stage, the yield stage and the destruction area. The elastic stage is the initial part which approximates a straight line. The yield stage is the middle part of the curve between the elastic stage and the stress peak. The destruction area is the decreasing part after the peak stress of the curve. As the axial static pressure increases in the range of 14–48 MPa (20–70%UCS), the brittleness of the specimen increases and the dynamic strength decreases. As the axial static pressure increases, the dynamic stress-strain curve of intact specimens becomes steeper. As the axial static pressure increases, the slope of the dynamic stress-strain loading curve of specimens with a cavity increases first and decreases afterwards. As shown in When axial static pressure is 0.2UCS, the dynamic strength of specimens with a cavity is 21% lower than that of intact specimens, and the combined strength is 19% lower than that of intact specimens. When the axial static pressure is 0.6UCS, the dynamic strength of specimens with a cavity is 38% lower than that of intact specimens, and the combined strength is 26% lower than that of intact specimens. With the increase of axial static stress, the existence of internal cavity results in a more remarkable decrease in the strength of specimens. The cavity of specimens causes the significant reduction of the dynamic strength and combined strength. The strength reduction is caused by the cavity which leads to stress concentration inside the specimen. The dynamic elasticity modulus is the tangent modulus, which is the slope of a straight line or approximately a straight line of a stress-strain curve. The dynamic elastic modulus of the specimen with a cavity increases first and decreases afterwards, and the maximum elastic modulus is obtained at 40% of UCS. The elastic modulus increases because of the strengthening effect of axial static pressure on the specimen. The decrease of the elastic modulus is caused by the cavity, which results in the decrease of the uniaxial compressive strength of the specimen. Failure is occurred to the specimen with a cavity when axial static stress is loaded to 80% of UCS. It indicates that when axial stress is at 60%, 70% of UCS, the specimen with a cavity may enter the yield stage. In other words, the specimen with a cavity has already suffered the internal damage, and its resistance to deformation after internal damage will be significantly reduced under the condition of 60% and 70% of UCS axial static stress. The elasticity modulus is then significantly reduced. The dynamic elastic modulus of specimens with a cavity is greater than that of intact specimen under 20–40% of UCS axial static pressure, because the specimen with a cavity is more intensive than the intact specimen under the same axial stress. It indicates that the cavity leads to the increase of dynamic elastic modulus of specimens in the lower range of axial static pressure. However, the dynamic elastic modulus of specimens with a cavity is smaller than that of intact specimens under 60–70% of UCS axial static stress, because the internal damage of specimens with a cavity is caused by the axial stress at this stage. It indicates that the cavity leads to the decrease of dynamic elastic modulus of specimens in the higher range of axial static pressure. The strain at peak strength is defined as the peak strain, which is dynamic peak strain. As shown in According to the second strength theory, the material breaks down as long as the material strain reaches the critical value. That is to say, the total strain is constant when the material is damaged. Pre-set axial static pressure on the specimen causes the specimen to produce an initial static strain. The larger the axial static pressure, the larger the initial static strain of rock. As it is calculated from Eq. The stress-strain curve of the same green sandstone specimen under static uniaxial compression is shown in As showed in A high-speed camera is used to record the crack propagation process of rocks in the coupled axial static and dynamic loading tests. The typical crack processes of the sandstone specimens are shown in As shown in As it is known, shear failure is usually occurred in the rock under the pure static loading As shown in Based on the elastic theory, tensile stress concentration will first occur at the left point or the right point of the hole, and the initial tensile cracks may generate at these positions accordingly even only under axial static pressure. However, it is difficult to observe by the naked eye. In addition, these tensile cracks cannot be opened and propagated far away because of the end confinement of the specimen. By using the DIC method, Li et al. Intact specimens and specimens with a cavity were tested under coupled axial static and dynamic loads. Based on the existing researches, mechanical characteristics and failure modes of intact rock under coupled static and dynamic loading were supplemented. Besides, the rock with a cavity was added for further research. The effects of the cavity on the dynamic strength, combined strength, elastic modulus, peak strain and failure characteristics of rock were obtained as follows. The dynamic elastic modulus of intact specimen increases with the increase of axial static pressure under 20–70% of UCS. The dynamic elastic modulus of the specimen with a cavity increases first and decreases afterwards, and reaches the maximum under 40% of UCS. The total strain of specimens under coupled axial static and dynamic loads is approximately a fixed value (about 1.16%). The peak strain of intact specimens and specimens with a cavity decreases with the increase of axial static pressure under 20–70% of UCS. The presence of the cavity can significantly reduce the peak strain of rock. The dynamic strength of intact specimens and specimens with a cavity decreases with the increase of axial static pressure under 20–70% of UCS. The combined strength of intact specimens and specimens with a cavity increases slightly with the increase of axial static pressure. As the axial load increases, the crack number of intact specimens and specimens with a cavity increase, and the damage degree of specimens becomes more serious. It indicates that when the in-situ geo-stress is high enough, only a much lower dynamic disturbance can lead to the rock failure. The internal cavity can significantly reduce the dynamic strength and the combined strength of rock. The dynamic strength is reduced by at least 21%, and the combined strength is reduced by at least 19%. With the increase of axial static stress, the existence of internal cavity causes the remarkable decrease of the specimen’s strength. When intact rock is subjected to combined static and dynamic loads, under the low axial static pressure (20–40% of UCS), dynamic load plays a major role in rock failure, resulting in splitting tensile failure in intact specimen; under the medium axial static pressure (60% of UCS), both of static and dynamic loads play a major role in rock failure, resulting in a composite tensile-shear failure in intact specimen; under the high axial static pressure (70% of UCS), static load plays a major role in rock failure where the shear failure occurs in intact specimens. However, when the specimen with an internal cavity is subjected to combined static and dynamic loads, no matter how large the axial static pressure is, the initial macro cracks usually generate in the upper and lower edge of cavity (compressive stress concentration areas), extend along the diagonal direction, forming the X-shaped main shear crack. It indicates that the cavity existence induces the shear failure of rock. The work was financially supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: