The technology of selective extraction of rhenium from alkaline solutions containing rhenium and molybdenum by solvent extraction using a mixture of tributyl phosphate and triotylamine as extractant has been investigated, complete separation of rhenium from alkaline solutions containing rhenium and molybdenum was possible after repeated extraction and repeated stripping. The results show that the mixture of 20% triotylamine and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil is selective extractant of rhenium with respect to molybdenum. It extracted molybdenum with extraction efficiency of 1.7%, while rhenium was extracted with efficiency of 96.8%, and separation coefficient β
                     Re/Mo is relatively good (1.7×103). The optimum extraction conditions have been determined experimentally as: “20% triotylamine and 30% tributyl phosphate, pH of the feed solution (9.0), room temperature, phase ratio (1:1)”, Stripping of rhenium to aqueous phase was efficient when 18% ammonia liquor were applied, the rhenium stripping efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.3% under conditions of O:A ratio of 1:1 for 10 min at 40 °C.Rhenium is a less common metal with special properties and is widely used in the petrochemical industry, aviation, electron, medicine and metallurgy etc. Because of the higher value of rhenium than that of molybdenum, the recovery of rhenium from rhenium bearing materials has both economic and environmental benefits and received much attention in our literature ( The current industrial practice of recovery rhenium from rhenium bearing materials can be described as leaching–extraction and leaching-ion exchanging resin absorbing–eluting processes ( In general, extraction of metal anions with amines is a common method for the recovery of molybdenum and rhenium. The common amine extractant, tri- Solvent extraction method is used especially for separation of rhenium from other components, such as arsenic, tungsten or molybdenum. Most frequently, for rhenium extraction tri- The objective of this study was that the extraction and separation of rhenium from alkaline leach solutions containing rhenium and molybdenum by solvent extraction using a mixture of tributyl phosphate and triotylamine as extractant. The organic phase consists of an extractant, a modifier, and a diluent. The extractant is triotylamine (N235), which is purchased from Shanghai, China. The modifier is tributyl phosphate (TBP), which is purchased from Langfang Longtengyu Fine Chemicals Co., Ltd, China. Commercial kerosene (China Petroleum & Chemical Corporation, China) was used as diluents. Rhenium and molybdenum synthetic alkaline solutions were prepared from reagent grade ammonium molybdate and ammonium perrhenate. Ammonia liquor, hydrochloric acid, sec-caprylic alcohol and H The aqueous solutions were prepared by electric-oxidating the original ore sample, which came from the Dexing Copper Mine, Jiangxi Province, China; the original ore sample was analyzed by using sps8000 ICP-AES (Beijing, China), and the compositions of molybdenite concentrate are listed in The selectivity and extraction capability of the several extractions for the Mo and Re was shown by using a molybdenum-containing synthetic alkaline solution in which the salts ammonium molybdate and ammonium perrhenate reagent grade were added. The composition of the initial synthetic solution was as follows: Mo 15 g/L, Re 0.1 g/L, and the pH value of the solution is 9. The separation efficiency was taken as the ratio of the corresponding extraction percentages ( The phase contact time was set to 10 min. In solvent extraction experiments, 10 mL of aqueous phase were mixed with different volumes of extractant of a desired concentration in different diluents at room temperature. The phase contact time was set to 10 min and the mixture was then poured into separation funnel, phases disengaged within 30 s after mixing and after several minutes delaminated phases were separated and their volume was measured. Organic phases were collected (for stripping studies), and aqueous phases were analyzed for rhenium and molybdenum content. The concentrations of rhenium and molybdenum were determined by colorimetry using butyl rhodamine and thiocyanate respectively. To compare with the selectivity and extraction capability of the several extractions, a series leaching tests were carried out under conditions of O:A ratio of 1:1 for 10 min at room temperature as shown in Comparative tests of various extractants have shown that the highest rhenium recovery (above 97%) was reached for the mixture of 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil. Significantly lower results were obtained when TBP in kerosene oil (22.3%) and the mixture of 20% N235 and 20% sec-caprylic alcohol diluted kerosene oil (8.1%) were used. As it turned out, the most selective extractant of rhenium with respect to molybdenum is the mixture of 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil. It extracted molybdenum with extraction efficiency of 1.6%, while rhenium was extracted with efficiency of 97.6%, and separation coefficient From Hence all the experiments were conducted with the mixture of 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil. Effect of parameters for maximum metal recovery was studied and is given below. For the feed solution, extractions were conducted with the 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil. The results of the studies into influence of phase ratio on extraction efficiency are presented in High rhenium extraction efficiencies (about 97%) were obtained when the ratio of aqueous phase to organic phase (volume) was in the range from 1:2 to 1:1. When the ratio of aqueous phase to organic phase (volume) was 2:1 rhenium extraction degree went down to 76.7%. Therefore extraction of rhenium from the solution with the 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil should be conducted at the ratio of aqueous phase volume to the volume of organic phase equal to 1:1. That guarantees maximum effectiveness of extraction process, i.e. maximum efficiency and selectivity. These limitations are directly related to very high but limited capacities of the extractants for rhenium extraction. In the next investigations the most advantageous pH for conducting efficient rhenium extraction was examined. For the feed solution, results of studies into influence of pH on efficiency and selectivity of rhenium extraction with the 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil are presented in The solutions were shaken for a varying pH values for 10 min, using hydrochloric acid and ammonia solution to adjust the pH value. From 10 mL of extractant was added to 10 mL of the feed solution, and the whole volume was intensely stirred for 10 min, phases disengaged within 30s after mixing. The effect of leaching temperature on rhenium extraction was investigated in the range of 10–50 °C. The results in The objective of this part of the study was to determine conditions for stripping of rhenium from the extractants, i.e. the 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil, to aqueous phases. The stripping operation should produce aqueous solution of the possibly highest rhenium concentration and the lowest molybdenum content. For the feed solution, the stripping of rhenium and molybdenum was investigated with respect to the effects of ammonia liquor concentration, by changing leaching temperature and aqueous to organic ratio. The results of investigations into stripping of rhenium and molybdenum with various agents to aqueous phase are presented in From the obtained results it can be observed that stripping of rhenium (from the 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil) to aqueous phase was efficient when 18% ammonia liquor were applied. The rhenium stripping efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.3% under conditions of O:A ratio of 1:1 for 10 min at 40 °C. Unfortunately, in those conditions also intensive molybdenum stripping was observed, the concentration of molybdenum and rhenium in solutions after extraction and stripping are 0.279 g/L, 0.125 g/L respectively.  For the feed solution, the results show that the mixture of 20% N235 and 30% tributyl phosphate diluted kerosene oil is selective extractant of rhenium with respect to molybdenum. It extracted molybdenum with extraction efficiency of 1.7%, while rhenium was extracted with efficiency of 96.8%, and separation coefficient Stripping of rhenium to aqueous phase was efficient when 18% ammonia liquor were applied. The rhenium stripping efficiencies in the examined conditions were about 99.3% under conditions of O:A ratio of 1:1 for 10 min at 40 °C, the concentration of molybdenum and rhenium in solutions after extraction and stripping are 0.279 g/L, 0.125 g/L respectively. The authors are thankful to the 11th Five-year Plan of National Scientific and Technological Program of China (2007 BAB22B01).