In the present study, advanced oxidation processes, UV/H2O2, UV/O3, and UV/H2O2/O3 have been applied to bleach and degrade organic dye C.I. Reactive Red 45 in water solution. Influence of pH and hydrogen peroxide dosage on process efficiency was investigated. The rate of color removal was studied by measuring the absorbance at the characteristic wavelength while mineralization rates were obtained on the basis of total organic carbon (TOC) and adsorbable organic halides (AOX) measurements. Complete bleaching was achieved by all applied processes after 60min while the maximal mineralization extent depended on the reaction conditions for each of the processes. It has been found that UV/H2O2/O3 process was the most efficient with 61.1% TOC removal and 72.0% AOX removal, respectively, achieved after a 1-h treatment. Time required for complete mineralization of RR45 by UV/H2O2 and UV/H2O2/O3 processes was determined as well.Synthetic dyes are one of the major industrial pollutants and water contaminants. During the synthesis and usage of organic dyes, at least 4% of the dye production is lost to the industrial wastewater per year ( Chemical treatments, such as advanced oxidation processes (AOPs), appear more appropriate for treating wastewaters containing organic dyes ( The aim of this study was to investigate the application of UV-based processes, UV/H An annular 0.75 C.I. Reactive Red 45 (RR45) was obtained from Ciba-Geigy and used without any purification. The chemical structure of the reactive dye studied is shown in Initial pH values and hydrogen peroxide concentration ranged from 3 to 11 The decolorization of the RR45 solution was monitored by a Perkin Elmer Lambda EZ 201 UV/VIS spectrophotometer at a wavelength Since the initial pH values and H Complete bleaching was achieved in all experiments where UV radiation was combined with H The reactivity of H Ozone is also known as an effective oxidant for removing the color carriers especially in combination with UV and/or H Hydroxyl radicals have much higher oxidation potential than that of ozone molecules resulting in a higher total rate of organic substrate degradation ( Finally, third applied UV-based process for RR45 degradation in this study was UV photolysis-combined oxidative agents discussed above, H Since pH 8 was found as the most efficient for TOC removal, the following set of experiments was performed to determine the optimal initial H Results shown here for RR45 decolorization, where complete bleaching by all UV based processes was demonstrated, indicate high sensitivity of azo chromophores in dye molecule toward attack by OH radicals generated. On the other hand, lower mineralization extents were obtained in all cases, with the highest TOC removal of 61.1% obtained in the case of UV/H  UV enhanced by ozonation in cases with and without addition of H Additional experiments were performed to determine time required for the complete mineralization of RR45 model solution by UV/H In this experimental work, decolorization and mineralization of RR45 commercial dye were investigated by using several UV-based advanced oxidation processes: UV, UV/H We would like to acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Science, Education and Sport, Republic of Croatia, Project # 0125-018. We are gratefully acknowledged on the support from the National Science Foundation (USA) (INT-0086351) for supplying the ozone generator. We thank Dr. Vedrana Marin from Florida State University (College of Medicine) for help as an external reviewer for English.