The Lifshitz–Slezov–Wagner (LSW) theory of Ostwald ripening [I.M. Lifshitz, V.V. Slezov, Zh Exp Teor Fiz 35 (2(8)) (1958) 479–492; C.Z. Wagner, Elektrochemistry 65 (7/8) (1961) 581–591. [1,2]] and Kabalnov's extension [A.S. Kabalnov, A.V. Pertzov, E.D. Shchukin, Colloid Surf 24 (1987) 19–32 [3]] is applied to theoretically analyze the stability of single and two component monomer emulsion drops (C1—monomer, C2—additional compound with low solubility in the continuous phase), respectively. The analysis is carried out for monomers frequently used in heterophase polymerizations such as methyl methacrylate (MMA), butyl acrylate (BA), styrene (STY), tert-butyl styrene (TBS), and lauryl methacrylate (LMA) and C2 with varied solubility in the continuous phase. Conclusions are drawn from the results regarding heterophase polymerizations carried out with such monomer emulsions. The calculations show that the solubility of both C1 and C2 in the continuous phase in combination with the concentration of C2 and the average emulsion drop size as well as the width of its distribution determines essentially the stability of emulsions.The ability to control the composition and the properties of particles in polymer dispersions by preparation of corresponding monomer emulsions might be desirable and advantageous goal as all imponderableness of the polymerization process could be avoided. Furthermore, semibatch polymerization procedures with seed particles, which are the state of the art in many industrial procedures to prepare polymer dispersions The excess chemical potential of monomer emulsion droplets ( The equilibrium as described by Eqs. For the particular model calculations put together in It is to emphasize that The rate of OR for a single component drop (   Secondly, the increase becomes remarkable only for droplets with a size below 20 Since the pioneering work of Higuchi and Mishra The derivative of Eq. In the practical case of a polydisperse drop size distribution there are with respect to the volume flux three kinds of drops: drops with a size smaller than a critical size ( It is a reasonable assumption that the volume fluxes of the components ( All curves depicted clearly show the influence of the C2 compound. Except for LMA These curves show that Some additional remarks are necessary regarding the influence of the nature of C2 on emulsion preparation which might of importance for subsequent polymerization. Eq. Another interesting aspect deals with the question what happens if C2 is a polymeric material. This is of special interest for subsequent polymerization reaction in emulsions as the polymeric C2 can be of the same or of very similar nature as the monomer or monomer combination forming the emulsion droplets, which means that the final polymer particles are not contaminated with foreign materials. Furthermore, the solubility of polymer molecules like polystyrene in water is above a certain degree of polymerization practically zero thus, favoring a scenario as described in According to the data in The data depicted in The LSW theory In general, emulsions made by any comminution technique, also two component emulsions containing C2 with a much lower solubility in the continuous phase than the main component C1, are not stable per se against Ostwald ripening unless they are perfectly monodisperse and they contain a mol-fraction of C2 given by relation The data in Usually the preparation and the polymerization of emulsions are carried out at different temperatures. The data summarized in The above theoretical considerations lead to the conclusions that as long as the technique employed to prepare emulsions results in droplets with a size distribution the drop size distribution will change after stopping the comminution. Also, the addition of C2 that is insoluble (