The steelmaking industry that uses electric arc furnaces to recycle steel scrap generates dust (EAFD) as its main residue. This waste must be treated to recycle some heavy metals for economic reasons and to prevent negative environmental impacts. It is formed basically by different metallic oxides with heterogeneous composition and size. The Waelz Kiln Technology is the most commonly used technology for this purpose, generating concentrates of Zn and Pb oxides (called Waelz oxides). The main component of Waelz oxides is zinc and nowadays the production of metallic zinc and high purity zinc oxide covers approximately 97 % of the zinc market. The impurities content in the Waelz oxides (different heavy metals, halogens, …) makes impossible to use it as raw material to produce industrial high purity zinc oxide or in the electrolytic production of metallic zinc. At present, the Waelz oxides are blended with other purer raw materials. That supposes the unfeasibility of obtaining these products only through direct recycling EAFD. Therefore, the goal of this work is an in-depth study of the newest hydrometallurgical processes in order to achieve the production of these zinc products from Waelz oxides, showing their possibilities and limitations.The productivity performance of the metallurgical industry is really high due to their structural importance in the manufacturing industry ( These by-products are categorized as dangerous and hazardous industrial waste ( Accordingly, the metallurgic wastes should be treated and if/when it is possible they should be recycled to increase the added-value of the metals contained in those wastes. In what follows, it will be reviewed the state-of-the-art of waste treatment. Approximately 1,6 billion tons of steel are necessary every year. 40 % of the processed steel is obtained from recycled waste-feed, i.e. scrap smelted in electric arc furnaces ( During the melting and blowing operations solid particulates are formed. These solids are recovered using bag-filters or an electrostatic precipitator installation. In most of the cases, this residue is identified as electric arc furnace dust (EAFD). EAFD contains a considerable concentration of zinc, ranging from 22 % to 28 % ( In this secondary fusion of steel, approximately 15 The zinc concentration in the dust depends on the kind of scrap that it is processed in the electric arc furnace ( As it is expected, different iron oxides are the major components of EAFD (being magnetite Fe The Waelz process is the most used technology for treating EAFD, generating a solid, which is a mix of zinc and lead oxides with several impurities called Waelz Oxide (WO). Being this technique the most widely preferred in order to recover zinc from EADF in 2014, near 90 % of this waste is treated using Waelz kiln technology, which is considered the best available technology (BAT) from 2000 ( Breeze coke makes up 25-40 % of Waelz Process supply. This material generates reducing conditions throughout the furnace ( The furnace is split up into two zones: Load zone: harsh reducing conditions are established; charcoal and zinc containing materials are supplied. Free zone: weak reducing and oxidizing conditions are found; this atmosphere favours the gaseous zinc transformation in ZnO particles. The temperature inside the equipment is adjusted by means of the air introduced in the furnace. Temperature can reach 1,250 These reactions occur because the furnace operates with an excess of breeze coke and most of it is recovered from the process. This process is the combination of the following main reactions (at standard conditions, 25 During Waelz Process, the lead (Pb) contained in the EAFD is volatilized significantly as lead (II) sulphide (PbS). With the exception of the lead (II) chloride (PbCl Zn, PbS and CO vapours generated in the load zone are subsequently burnt with excess air in the free zone of the furnace. This process produces the following main reactions (at standard conditions, 25 Roasted zinc ores (from EAFD) hold several impurities and other zinc derived by-products such as ferrites, silicates, sulphides and sulphates. Released zinc oxide (ZnO) and zinc ferrites (Zn Since zinc is less noble than iron, zinc ferrite (ZnFe Since silica is more stable than zinc oxide, zinc silicate will be reduced by the following reaction: Hence, Waelz process permits the zinc enrichment of EAFD ( Bag filters or electrostatic precipitators located after the furnace are the responsible for cleaning the furnace gas. This gas contains the finely divided zinc fume. Oxidation heat radiates back to the inlet load and helps to provide the necessary heat for the reduction process ( Waelz oxide is collected with a chain conveyor and transported afterwards to the hot briquetting plant or to other treatment plants by means of a pneumatic system. At the same time, generated Waelz slag is discharged continuously from the end of the kiln into a quench system. This by-product (Waelz Iron Product) contains all the non-volatile components of the raw material, mainly iron and calcium oxides, which can be used in the clay ceramics industry ( As previously indicated, Waelz oxide is the product of the Waelz process. This solid is a mix of zinc and lead oxides with several impurities. The chemical and mineralogical characterization of the Waelz oxide used as example of raw material in this study is shown in Waelz oxide is a solid mixture with a powdery appearance; it has a grey colour and its average particle size is d Zinc is the fourth most common metal in use, trailing only iron, aluminium, and copper with an annual production of about 12 million tonnes. China is the largest producer country in the world, followed by Peru and Australia ( Over 12 million tons of zinc products are produced annually worldwide ( Thus, it is considered appropriate to study the main characteristics of the technologies and industrial processes used to turn out the most commercial zinc products. In these processes are described the limitations of Waelz oxide as raw material. Moreover, it is highlighted the relevance of completing the zinc recycling cycle through the reviewed hydrometallurgical processes. At present, two different ways are being used to produce metallic zinc: Imperial Smelting Furnace (ISF) process and electrolytic process. Imperial Smelting Furnace (ISF): Currently about 8-10 % of the primary zinc of the world production is through the Imperial Smelting Process. This process co-produces lead bullion in addition to zinc metal using a mix of lead and zinc concentrates or complex lead-zinc concentrates as raw material. The Imperial Smelting Process is similar to the blast furnace processes except that it is operated with hot top whereby preventing re-oxidation of zinc vapours. Waelz oxide is a useful raw material for this process. Its chemical composition fulfils the quality specifications and its required mechanical properties are improved through a simple briquetting process. Therefore, using Waelz oxide as raw material in ISF, metallic zinc is obtained. Consequently, the zinc recycling cycle could be completed from steelmaking wastes without any additional treatment different from the Waelz process. Electrolytic Process: Refining zinc by distillation is a heat-consuming process. It may be economic in localities with cheap fuel and with demand for high-purity zinc. On the whole, however, the market for high-purity zinc is covered by the electrolytic process. Today, over 90 % of the zinc is produced hydrometallurgically in electrolytic plants ( Nowadays, there are not industrial electrochemical facilities able to work with Waelz oxide as a raw material: several impurities must be removed before the electrolysis stage. Besides, the halogen content in the product may also significantly reduce the value of the products ( High-purity zinc oxide is the most produced and widely used zinc compound. It is used in rubber vulcanization as a catalyst in its manufacture. It is also employed in ceramics, paints, animal food, pharmaceuticals and in many other products and processes. In addition, special grade of zinc oxide has long been used in photocopiers. The oxide is also used in varistors, providing protection against over-voltages. The ZnO market supposes 100,000 Moreover, the rest of the zinc compounds (ZnSO After EAFD is treated through Waelz process, increasing the zinc content and modifying the mineralogy of the zinc compounds, obtained Waelz oxide is a useful raw material for zinc industry, but it still has certain limitations. Therefore, WO is an important zinc source if it is mixed with purer zinc raw materials. Otherwise, the sustainability of the zinc industry could be increased if the WO would be suitable itself as raw material in order to produce the most important zinc products. Different hydrometallurgical processes have been studied and developed so as to overcome remaining constrains (level of impurities) of WO for some commercial zinc products obtaining processes. WO can make a major contribution towards a circular economy, helping to achieve a more sustainable and resource efficient future for all. For this reason, the main objective of this review is to expose the most promised hydrometallurgical processes developed in order to produce the most important zinc products using WO as sole zinc source. By this way, the combination of Waelz Kiln Technology with a chosen hydrometallurgical process permits to complete the zinc recycling cycle from treating EADF. Considering chemical, mineralogical and morphological characteristics of the WO, several hydrometallurgical processes are reviewed and described in the following point. Thus, these processes have been chosen because of they reach metallic yields up to 90 % (zinc recovery indicates the degree of sustainability) from WO, achieving the required quality of the target high added value products ( As previously stated, metallic zinc and ZnO are the most produced zinc compounds worldwide. Waelz oxide, by itself, is not a useful raw material in these industrial production processes, due to its high impurities content. Hydrometallurgy could make viable the use of WO as the potential sole zinc source in the most important zinc products production processes. This means that the application of several hydrometallurgical processes could suppose an important increase of zinc recycling rate from steelmaking wastes. Moreover, it could reduce the need of primary resources extraction. As a result, many of the fundamental studies in hydrometallurgy are focused on obtaining metallic zinc and high purity zinc oxide from WO. Essentially, halides contents (fluorine and chlorine) in WO are the most penalising impurities to be fed into the leaching stage of electrolytic zinc production process. Sulphuric solution used as leaching liquor in the electrolysis plants dissolves those halides, being present as fluorides and chlorides in the aqueous solution. The fluorides (F- ions) severely affect the zinc adherence in the electrolysis and also cause the corrosion of the aluminium cathodes ( Zinc Sulphate Electrowinning (ZSE) process is the most used method in order to produce metallic zinc in electrolytic plants. Nowadays, the halogens content of Waelz oxide forces to zinc producers to blend it with the zinc sulphide concentrates, being treated together in the oxidising roasting stage. The roasting of this blending with air is carried out in a fluidised bed reactor at temperatures around 1,000 This purified WO (called Double Leached Waelz Oxide) is leached in the acid leaching of the ZSE process. A selective precipitation of fluorides was designed and optimized in order to obtain a zinc sulphate liquor suitable for electrowinning ( The pH is optimized modifying the solubility product constant (K After reaching the admissible values for halides concentration in the zinc sulphate liquor, metallic impurities must be removed before electrolysis. In this process an iron removal stage must be applied after the selective precipitation, because the Fe cannot be removed by cementation when the zinc dust is used as cementation agent (   The EZINEX process (by Engitec Technologies S.P.A., European Pat. 551,155 Al) is another technology designed to convert oxidised zinc bearing materials (as WO) directly to zinc cathodes ( The lixiviation stage is carried out at a high temperature because of the low solubility of zinc ammino chlorides. But, the leaching reaction runs in the range of pH 5.5 to 7.5, avoiding the iron dissolution. The leaching liquor is purified by cementation with zinc dust. Finally, zinc is deposited in the electrolytic cell, which uses a cationic permselective membrane between the anodic a cathodic compartment. Due to the zinc solubility problems, this electrolysis is operated at relatively high temperature (70 The exhausted liquor contains some impurities, basically alkali chlorides and fluorides, calcium and magnesium. Those compounds modify the electrolyte conductivity but, in any case, they must be removed to avoid undesirable incrustations in the plant circuit. Two separation steps are added to the process flowsheet in order to remove these impurities: precipitation stage through carbonation and the evaporation/crystallisation unit.   In contrast, not the halides but the presence of metallic compounds, different from zinc (lead, copper, cadmium and so on), in WO supposes the most serious problem in order to obtain high purity zinc oxide. Otherwise, the halides content in Waelz oxide is not a limiting factor for this purpose because they are removed in the finishing thermal treatments employed in the developed processes (calcination step). Depending on the final use of the ZnO, the quality specifications are different. The interaction of metallic impurities in the final application of ZnO marks the limits in its quality specifications (grade) ( ZnO is the most used zinc compound worldwide, essentially produced using pyrometallurgical processes. WO is not a useful raw material in these processes because of its metallic impurities content. Some hydrometallurgical processes have been developed to enable the use of less pure zinc resources in high purity zinc oxide fabrication. Hydrometallurgical processes in acid media are the most studied alternatives for this purpose. Zinc present in WO is leached using hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid. When HCl is the chosen leaching liquor, a high zinc recovery is reached due to the complex ions formation reactions between metallic species and chlorides ( After the precipitation stage is optimized to maximize zinc recovery as zinc hydroxide, the precipitated solid is calcined obtaining the target high-purity ZnO (   Some processes have been developed using alkaline solutions as leaching liquor. The most promising alternatives have been carried out through lixiviation of zinc content in WO with caustic soda or ammonical (NH Caustic soda as leaching liquor: Several processes have been designed using caustic soda as leaching liquor for metallic zinc production. Sodium hydroxide is effective for zinc, cadmium and other heavy metals dissolution, without significant dissolution of iron. In contrast, the lower solubility of zinc in sodium hydroxide aqueous solution involves higher concentrated liquors (5-7 Ammonium carbonate as leaching liquor: Other important alternative uses ammonium carbonate and ammonia solutions as leaching liquors to purify Waelz oxide and it has been investigated by different researchers ( The main conclusion of these previous works is that a very promising ZnO production yield (higher than 85%) can be obtained from the hydrometallurgical treatment of WO, but ammonia and heavy metals solution discharge and solid wastes disposal make impossible its industrial application. So, further research was undertaken to get this process closer to its industrialization. These problems were solved improving an integrated hydrometallurgical process in order to treat these solid and liquid wastes ( In the designed process zinc is dissolved from the Waelz oxide with other impurities (i.e. iron, lead, cadmium and copper), these are eliminated from the zinc solution through purification stages: i) via oxidation with air (iron removal) and ii) via cementation with metallic zinc powder (removal of other metallic impurities). The purified zinc solution is precipitated through CO The improved treatment increases the pH of the exhausted liquor (over 11.5-12.0) in order to recover the dissolved ammonia, precipitating a high percentage of heavy metals from the liquid waste. The required alkalinity in order to modify the pH of the exhausted liquor is given by a caustic soda solution. Therefore, the generated and blended solid residues during the main hydrometallurgical processes are treated with this alkaline solution, before being employed in the ammonia recovery step. Then, the optimized mix of exhausted liquor and solid waste treating solution is fed to the ammonia recovery stage. Ammonia is recovered by stripping under optimized operation conditions inducing the removal of dissolved heavy metals by precipitation. Hence, the solid and liquid residues are inertized obtaining an ammonia gas stream used in the leaching liquor regeneration (   Some hydrometallurgical processes, using different kind of purification technology and appropriated operation conditions, are able to produce ultrapure zinc solutions from different raw materials (with several types of impurities). Those obtained solutions can be processed to obtain the desired final zinc product (SHG Zinc, ZnO, ZnSO The solvent extraction technology refers to the distribution of a solute between two immiscible liquid phases in contact with each other. One of the solutes, which initially is dissolved in only one of the two liquids, eventually distributes between the two phases. At equilibrium, the solute is at concentration [A Hence, due to the extreme sensitivity of zinc electrowinning from sulphate media to the presence of trace impurities, modern solvent extractants with high selectivity have been developed. These extractant are selective for zinc over most of the species deleterious to electrowinning (Cu, Cd, Co, Ni, and the halides) and are readily stripped by acid concentrations (Cole, 2002). Several hydrometallurgical processes have been developed using SX as purification stage in order to produce different zinc products. This process was developed by CENIM (Spain) and LNETI (Portugal) working in a joint project to treat complex polysulphide minerals in concentrated ammonium chloride solutions (Spanish Pat. Nº 8,902,487). Therefore, the CENIM - LNETI process has easily been adapted to recover zinc from WO. A concentrated ammonium chloride solution is the used liquor as leaching agent at moderate temperatures (< 150 Alkylphosphoric acids are the main group of this kind of extractant reagents used during many years, being di(-2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D After the purification of the organic solution, the desired material (zinc) is recovered from the organic solvent in a purified and concentrated form. In this case, sulphuric acid is used as the stripping agent in order to cause the desired product to leave the organic phase becoming soluble in the aqueous solution from which it can be recovered. The removed extractant is returned to the solvent extraction stage and the obtained aqueous zinc solution is fed to the electrolysis cells.   Técnicas Reunidas S.A. (Spain) developed this process to deal with the market demand offering a high degree of raw materials flexibility. The Modified Zincex® Process (MZP, European Pat. 1,361,296 B1) is a modification of Zincex® Process in order to treat solid oxidized materials or impure sulphate liquors ( This developed process includes a regeneration step for the stripped organic phase, treating with HCl to avoid the build up of co-extracted impurities, such as iron ( Therefore, the regenerated extractant is returned to the solvent extraction stage. The Modified Zincex® Process is an efficient and reliable technology, which permits to treat different raw materials, regardless of zinc content and the variety and quantity of impurities present.   Zinclor® Process (United States Pat. 4,401,531 A) was developed by Técnicas Reunidas S.A. (Spain) in order to treat zinc concentrates through chloride routes, thereby avoiding anode corrosion problems ( The extraction takes place via solvation of zinc chloride complexes, being ZnCl The extractant are really weak bases (B) and they are not protonated under low pH conditions after chloride leaching stage. With the neutralisation step, unwanted impurity metals are not transfer by ion pairing mechanism ( After the Zinclor process development, some research works have been carried out in order to check the extraction efficiency of different reagents as compared to DPPP. Alamine 336, CYANEX 923 and tri-n-butylphosphate (TBP) have been tested with satisfactory results at optimized operation conditions (   During the last 15 years, zinc (and other metals) recovery using biotechnology has been one of the most studied technologies with promising results ( The mechanism of bacterial leaching of metal sulphides has been discussed for a long time (  Glucose/Sucrose -heterotrophic bacteria-  Complexation of zinc with Citric acid: Precipitation of zinc by Oxalic acid: Glutamic acid was tested in cultures of Curtobacterium oceanusedimentum 81 and Plantibacter flavus 8 and 42 where important quantity of zinc was solubilized from ZnO and small amount with oxalic and citric acids, too ( Nowadays, these processes are being researched because of their environmentally friendly nature of metal extraction from different ores. Several bioleaching conditions must be optimized (chosen bacteria, culture medium, solid/liquid ratio and so on) in order to increase the zinc recovery, decreasing reaction time. In this way, it is intended to make economically suitable for developing and operating on industrial scale. The steelmaking industry is growing yearly, and as a consequence, the generated hazardous solid waste (EAFD) during production process supposes a high environmental problem. Hence, the treatment of EAFD is totally necessary, being Waelz Process the best available technology. At the same time, zinc products fabrication demands a large amount of zinc raw materials with high quality specifications (impurity levels). This document describes the most promising developed processes to obtain high added value zinc products from WO (as a result of EAFD treating operation) to complete the zinc recycling cycle. By the way, the application of these reviewed technologies contributes to the circular economy in response to the rising environmental concerns worldwide. Hydrometallurgy is going to take a major role in extractive industries reducing the environmental and safety impact. At present time, some of these processes are being gradually installed using secondary sources of zinc as raw material, but in small scale production factories. In near future, due to the prevailing need to increase the sustainability of metal industry, these technologies will be implemented, adapted and optimized by zinc producers. For this reason, new hydrometallurgical processes have being studied, improving their environmental and economic feasibility. Theses researches have the common objective of minimizing the final waste generation, improving the metal recycling yields and reducing the operational costs. With regard to hydrometallurgical processes based on bioleaching, nowadays, are being implemented commercially only in certain cooper, gold and uranium beneficiation plants. These technologies are really interesting due to their sustainability and low investment and operating costs. Thus, several research lines are opened in order to reach higher zinc recoveries and to reduce drastically the reaction time, making these processes economically suitable and industrially applicable. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the obtained information after this review process: Waelz Kiln Technology is the most used technology for treating EAFD to improve the sustainability of steel production. Waelz oxide supposes an important source of zinc available from recycling, but limited by high impurity levels. The impurities content of WO precludes its use as raw material in the most used high-purity ZnO production processes (pyrometallurgical ones) and electrolytic zinc obtaining process. Different hydrometallurgical processes have been developed in order to produce high-purity ZnO and SHG zinc using WO as the sole zinc source (raw material). The designed hydrometallurgical processes permit to complete the zinc recycling cycle that starts treating EAFD by Waelz Kiln Technology. Hydrometallurgical processes based on bioleaching suppose an increase in environmental sustainability, but must be continue in this research line in order to achieve the economic viability of them.