In an effort to extend the reutilization of waste foundry sand (WFS), we evaluated the use of WFS as a replacement for clay in tile manufacturing. The effects of WFS addition on the properties of clay tile specimens were investigated at six different levels of WFS replacement: 0, 10, 15, 20, 40, and 60%. These specimens were fired at one of three different kiln temperatures: 1,000, 1,050, and 1,100°C. Various physical analyses were performed to determine the properties of the finished tiles. The results of this study indicate that the properties of the tile specimens were improved by WFS supplementation and that the optimal clay replacement level was 15% WFS.The goals of reutilizing industrial by-products such as waste foundry sand (WFS) include reducing the use of natural resources and ameliorating the negative environmental and ecological impacts of industrial waste. Moreover, the reutilization of industrial waste can achieve the objective of sourcing green construction materials to reduce energy consumption and waste generation. The Taiwanese government allows WFS produced by industries such as the basic metal industry, the fabricated metal products industry, and the mechanical apparatus manufacturing and fixing industry to be directly reused. The main chemical components of these WFSs are silicon dioxide, aluminum oxide, and ferric oxide. These components are can improve the compactness and strength of reclaimed tiles (those manufactured from recycled or reused materials such as sewage sludge ash and WFS in admixture with clay). When WFS is reused as a construction material, it is typically employed as a raw material in cement or an aggregate in concrete. Siddiquea et al. [ Zanetti and Fiore [ Studies related to the use of WFS in tile manufacturing have been less frequently reported in the literature, especially discussions regarding the amount of clay replaced with WFS and the kiln temperatures at which the tiles were fired. In general, the abrasion and bending strength of reclaimed tiles are lower than those of clay tiles. However, WFS contains a higher amount of Fe Clay and WFS are the two primary materials used to manufacture tile specimens in this study. In this study, six levels of WFS replacement were evaluated: 0, 10, 15, 20, 40, and 60%. Reclaimed tile specimens were manufactured by uniformly mixing different quantities of WFS and clay with suitable amounts of water. Before the mixture was formed into strips, air was expelled from the mixture using a de-airing pug mill and a press machine. The strips were then cut into tiles of dimensions 12 cm × 6 cm × 1 cm. After a few days of development in a room with a temperature of approximately 27°C, these reclaimed tile specimens were fired in an electric furnace at a controlled temperature of 1,000, 1,050, or 1,100°C to complete the tile manufacturing process. The procedure for making reclaimed tile specimens is illustrated diagrammatically in The method of measuring the drying and firing shrinkage of reclaimed tile specimens is regulated by CNS 2887. Tile shrinkage is defined as the ratio of the lengths of the specimen before and after firing. The method of measuring the weight loss on ignition of reclaimed tile specimens is regulated by CNS3299. Weight loss on ignition measures the difference in the weights of each tile before and after firing. This weight loss is primarily due to the evaporation of moisture, the oxidative decomposition of organic matter, the decomposition of inorganic salts, and trace emission of heavy metals at high temperature. The method of measuring the water absorption of reclaimed tile specimens is regulated by CNS3299. For the water absorption test, specimens are oven-dried at 105 to 110°C for 3 hours and then placed in a desiccator to cool to room temperature. The specimens are weighed immediately after cooling. The specimens are then submerged in water for 24 hours, removed, patted dry with a lint-free cloth, and weighed. The water absorption is defined as the ratio of the weight of the water absorbed by the specimens to the weight of the dry specimens. The bending strength test was performed on the reclaimed tile specimens according to the CNS3299 standards. The bending strengths of the specimens are affected by the porosity, pore distribution, and vitrification of the tile bodies and their crystal morphologies. The acid-alkali test was also completed according to the CNS3299 standards. In this test, samples are cleaned with liquid detergent, placed in an oven at 105°C for 3 hours, and then cooled to room temperature before being exposed to the test solutions. Acid test: samples are placed in a hydrochloric acid solution for 24 hours and then rinsed under running water to remove any residual acid solution. The samples are examined for differences in appearance, including color changes and other abnormal reactions. If a sample is visibly attacked, the results of the acid test are recorded as “affected.” Alkali test: samples are placed in a potassium hydroxide solution for 24 hours and then rinsed under running water to remove any residual alkali solution. The samples are examined for differences in appearance, including color changes and other abnormal reactions. If a sample is visibly attacked, the results of the alkali test are recorded as “affected.” A high-resolution Hitachi S-4700 SEM (manufactured in Japan) was used to observe the surface microstructures of samples and small pieces of reclaimed tile bodies. The samples were coated with gold for better conductivity. The sample surfaces were examined at magnifications of 5,000X to obtain the microstructure images. A Shimadzu XRD-6000 X-ray diffractometer was used to characterize test samples that were ground to a powder and passed through a #100 sieve. Before the X-ray analysis, the powder was dried in an oven at 105°C for 24 hours and then placed in a desiccator to cool. After testing, the results were compared with data in the Joint Committee on Powder Diffraction Standards (JCPDS) database to determine the major crystalline components of the tile samples. The test parameters were a scan rate of 2°/min, a voltage of 40 kV, a current of 30 mA, and a 2θ range of 5° to 60°. Shrinkage is one of the primary phenomena observed upon firing a tile body and reflects possible increases in the numbers of contact points or surfaces among the particles and an increase or decrease of the number of pores within the tile body.  Moreover, the lowest weight loss on ignition was observed for specimens with 60% WFS replacement. This reduction in the weight loss on ignition was partly due to the larger particle size of WFS compared to clay. Furthermore, due to the higher iron content of the WFS, the binding interactions among particles may not be fully developed during the firing process. As a result, the reclaimed tile specimens exhibited less weight loss on ignition at higher WFS contents.   This increase in porosity led to higher water absorption values and was readily apparent at WFS replacement levels greater than 40%.    To understand the effects of WFS replacement on the characteristics of the reclaimed tile specimens, an SEM analysis was performed to observe the changes in the microstructures of the tile bodies, e.g., the crystalline states and porosities. The samples were small pieces from the surfaces and interiors of the tile bodies and were examined at 5,000X to obtain microstructure images. Heat transfer occurred in the interior of the tile body due to the high temperature of the firing process. When the kiln temperature reached 1,000°C, the particles bonded to each other.  As stated above, the siliconization of tile is related to the intensity of the SiO In this study, waste foundry sand was utilized as a replacement for clay in tile specimen manufacturing. After evaluating the tiles, we drew the following conclusions: The shrinkages of the tile specimens after firing at 1,000°C decreased as the WFS content increased, implying that particles in the tile body were effectively integrated by the driving force of the heat applied during the firing process. This result suggests that increasing the rate of waste foundry sand replacement can reduce the shrinkage values of tile specimens. The results of the weight loss on ignition test indicate that the weight losses of the tile specimens decreased as the WFS content increased. Moreover, tile specimens with waste foundry sand substitution exhibited less weight loss after firing at each of the tested firing temperatures. Because the waste foundry sand has a larger particle size than clay, pores of different sizes were distributed throughout the tile body in specimens with waste foundry sand supplementation. This increase in porosity led to greater water absorption, which became readily apparent at foundry sand replacement rates greater than 40%. The bending strengths of the tile specimens increased as the amount of waste foundry sand increased up to 15%. As determined from SEM images, when clay was replaced with 15% waste foundry sand, the surface particles were well bonded with each other and the pore sizes were small. Moreover, the bonded surfaces were relatively flat, and the pore channels were smooth. In the interior of the tile body, necks were formed, resulting in improved adhesion interactions among the particles. The diffusion bonding was better than that of the control clay tile specimens. However, when the WFS replacement level increased beyond 15%, the bending strength was reduced and rapidly decreased for tile specimens with more than 40% waste foundry sand replacement. After soaking in both acid and alkali solutions, the strengths of the specimens with 15% waste foundry sand replacement were greater than those of specimens with 0 and 40% replacements. This result indicates that specimens with 15% WFS replacement exhibited the best resistance to acid and alkali attack. However, higher amounts of waste foundry sand replacement may negatively affect the resistance of tile specimens to acid and alkali attack. 6. The SiO