Background
                  The aim of this retrospective study was to evaluate the efficacy of a lateral parapatellar approach combined with a tibial tubercle osteotomy (TTO) in patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty (TKA) with non-correctable valgus knee osteoarthritis.
               
                  Methods
                  We studied 53 consecutive patients (57 knees) who had a primary TKA via lateral parapatellar approach with a global step-cut “coffin” type TTO over a 10-year period. All patients had non-correctable grade II valgus deformity according to the Ranawat classification. The average age of patients was 71years (45 to 77) and the mean follow-up was 39months (20 to 98).
               
                  Results
                  Post-surgery, there was a significant improvement in knee extension (p=0.002), flexion (p=0.006), Knee Society Pain and Function Scores (p<0.001) and WOMAC Osteoarthritis Index (p<0.001). The tibiofemoral angle changed from a preoperative median value of 11deg (10 to 17) to a postoperative value of 3.75deg (0 to 9). Congruent patellar tracking was observed in all cases. All but one osteotomy united in a median period of 16.7weeks (9 to 28) and no hardware removal was required. One knee developed infection treated with two-stage reconstruction. A proximal tibial stress fracture also occurred in a patient on long-term bisphosphonate therapy.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Lateral parapatellar approach along with TTO is an effective technique for addressing non-correctable valgus knee deformity during TKA.Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) remains the gold standard for the treatment of end-stage knee osteoarthritis (OA). Usually the knee develops a varus deformity but valgus malalignment occurs in approximately 10% of cases Under difficult circumstances, such as severe fixed deformities with joint stiffness, exposure of the surgical field is compromised. Patella subluxation and eversion, proper visualization of the joint, precise bone cuts and correction of ligamentous imbalance may be difficult to achieve without jeopardizing the integrity of the extensor mechanism Several techniques have been described to deal with these problems including rectus snip, quadriceps and patellar turndown, V-Y quadriceps-plasty and tibial tubercle osteotomy (TTO) The combination of TTO along with the lateral parapatellar approach has been reported to date in small series of patients under diverse primary or revision knee conditions using different fixation techniques of the osteotomy fragment Institutional review board approval was obtained for the study. We retrospectively evaluated 53 consecutive patients (34 females) who underwent 57 primary TKAs via lateral parapatellar approach and TTO over a 10-year period (1999–2009). A single surgeon (SM) performed all surgery using a cemented posterior stabilized knee prosthesis (Genesis II, Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN). Patellar replacement was performed if there was excessive wear of the patellar surface (39 knees). The mean follow-up was 39 All patients had non-correctable grade II valgus deformity according to Ranawat classification Patients with previous knee surgery such as arthroplasty, fracture osteosynthesis or osteotomy were excluded from the study. All knees were scheduled to be evaluated clinically and radiographically preoperatively and postoperatively at 6 A curved lateral skin incision was followed by a standard lateral parapatellar arthrotomy. The tibial tubercle was identified and multiple drill holes were made around the tibial insertion of patellar tendon creating a 1 Statistical analysis was carried out with use of the SPSS software package (SPSS 17.0, Chicago, Illinois). Since data histograms showed skewed distribution of the variables, nonparametric methods of analysis were chosen. Data are presented as number of cases or as median with range in round brackets. The Wilcoxon test was used for comparison of the numeric variables. Statistical significance was assumed for p Median knee extension improved from 7 Preoperatively, five knees had flexion contracture of more than 20 Knee Society Pain Score The tibiofemoral angle changed from a preoperative median value of 11 A female patient with rheumatoid arthritis experienced poor wound healing and subsequent breakdown, which was addressed with a gastrocnemius flap. She also displayed non-union of the tibial osteotomy with migration of the bone fragment. However, the patient had a good outcome (ROM: 10–90 One male patient suffering from rheumatoid arthritis developed an infection 3 Another knee developed a proximal tibial stress fracture at 6 The results of this study support the utilization of lateral parapatellar approach along with TTO during TKA for non-correctable valgus knee OA To date, the reported results of lateral parapatellar approach along with TTO have supported its use. Burki et al. In all the described TTO studies, the tibial tubercle was osteotomized in a longitudinal fashion and it was elevated and displaced medially. Two or three screws or wires were used from anterior to posterio-medial cortex but fixation techniques did not seem to clinically affect the final outcome The length and depth of the osteotomized fragment have been considered important intraoperative factors for the success of TTO. Wolf et al. One patient in our study suffering from RA developed a wound infection. Several observational studies showed a mixed picture for the threat of serious infection after DMARD medication in patients with RA, who already are at risk because of their underlying disease Recent reports have described atypical fractures in patients who have been taking bisphosphonates long term The strength of this study is that it comprises a consecutive series of patients with the same type of knee deformity who underwent the same reconstruction approach by a single surgeon. Furthermore, no loss to follow-up was reported. Limitations of the study result from its retrospective nature, the lack of statistical power due to the relatively small sample size and the lack of a comparison group (medial parapatellar arthrotomy with TTO, for example). The results of the current study strongly support the use of a lateral parapatellar arthrotomy combined with TTO as a valid approach in cases of significant valgus deformity. Ultimately, however, the surgical approach used for TKA of non-correctable valgus knee OA will be determined by the surgeon's preference and experience, as well as observations such as those described in this study. There is clearly no one definitive solution for all cases, and each TKA procedure must be considered on an individual basis. No funds were received in support of this work. No benefits in any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article.