A microbiological process using Pseudomonas mendocina MCM B-180 was developed for the removal of tellurite from solutions. During the process tellurite was transformed into metallic tellurium. The process, when carried out in a 2-l continuously stirred tank reactor in the presence of sucrose and diammonium hydrogen phosphate as nutrients, removed 10 mg/l tellurium in 12 h with an efficiency exceeding 99.8%. The process could sustain wide variations in pH (5.5–8.5), temperatures (25–45 °C) and initial tellurium concentration (10–100 mg/l). An integrated biosorption–bioreduction process for the treatment of waste photovoltaic modules demonstrates the utility of microbial tellurite reduction.Tellurium and its compounds have been used primarily as an additive to steel to increase its ductility, as a brightner in electroplating baths, as an additive to catalysts for the cracking of petroleum and as a coloring material in the manufacture of colored glasses. The metalloid tellurium is known to be toxic to microorganisms. The toxicity of tellurite may be related to its ability to act as a strong oxidant. Strains of Bioreduction of tellurite has, however, not been studied with respect to the recovery of tellurium from industrial wastes. The present paper deals with the studies carried out in our laboratory for the development of a microbiological tellurite reduction process. A chromate reducing strain of Studies on tellurite reduction were carried out in sealed serum bottles (40 ml) containing 20 ml sterile medium supplemented with tellurite. All experiments were performed in duplicates with uninoculated controls run simultaneously. The media were inoculated with cell suspensions (0.5 ml containing 10 A borosilicate bottle of 2 l working volume having two ports was specially fabricated and used as a reactor. The contents of the reactor were agitated with a magnetic stirrer. The waste water supplemented with nutrients was added at the bottom of the reactor through one of the two ports with the help of a programmable variable peristaltic pump. The treated suspension was removed from the top (at the liquid-headspace gas interface) through another port using a peristaltic pump. The rates of inflow and outflow were identical. The outflow from the reactor was filtered to remove the reduced tellurium. The tellurium free medium was recycled if necessary. Initially, 200 ml of Waste CdTe photovoltaic cells were procured from EcoSolar Systems (India). The cells consisted of glass plates (dimensions 7.5×7.5×0.3 cm) coated with cadmium sulfide, cadmium telluride and an organo-silver compound. The average combined weight of the materials coated on a cell was 0.6 g containing silver (37.1%), cadmium (3.72%), tellurium (2.02%), organic matter (57.15%). Scrapings (10 g) from CdTe solar cells were treated with 100 ml 4 M nitric acid for about an hour to solubilize silver, cadmium and tellurium. The insoluble organic matter was filtered out and the filtrate was diluted to 1 l with deionized water in a volumetric flask. The average metal content in the solution thus obtained was: silver (3710 mg/l), cadmium (372 mg/l) and tellurium (201 mg/l). This solution was diluted 30 times with deionized water and used for further metal removal and recovery experiments. The recovery of tellurium by bioreduction process was a part of an integrated process developed in our laboratory  The present investigation was directed towards the development of a microbial process for the removal of tellurite from industrial effluents, which, typically contain very low quantities of organics. When the possible substrates for tellurite reduction were evaluated The course of the CSTR experiment using The tellurite reduction efficiency of the system was found to be 80% on the first day, and increased to 99.1% and 99.7% on days 2 and 3, respectively, when batch experiments were performed. From the fourth day, the reactor was operated in a continuous mode with HRT (hydraulic retention time) of 24 h when the tellurite reduction efficiency was 99.8%. From the seventh day onwards the HRT was decreased to 18 h without affecting the removal efficiency. The removal efficiency remained constant even after the HRT was decreased further to 12 h from the tenth day. However, further decrease in the HRT adversely affected the tellurite reduction efficiency (data not shown). After the reduction of 10 mg/l tellurite had been optimised by adjusting the HRT at 12 h, the tellurite concentration in the feed was increased to 25 mg/l on day 16. During this period the efficiency of tellurite removal decreased to 80% and the HRT had to be increased to 24 h to restore maximum efficiency. Thereafter the concentration of tellurium in the feed was increased to 50 mg/l and HRT was set to 48 h. The tellurium removal efficiency was 90%, which then increased to 99% on the 21st day. When the tellurium concentration in the feed was adjusted to 100 mg/l, the HRT had to be maintained at 72 h. Thus, all other factors remaining constant, it was observed that the HRT of the system was determined by tellurite concentration in the feed. Thus, at higher tellurite concentration, HRT had to be increased to achieve optimal metal removal efficiency. The pH of the tellurite-containing feed was 7.5 throughout the experiment. The pH of the treated (tellurite-free) water coming out of the reactor was consistently 6.8–7.0. The dissolved oxygen concentration in the reactor was <1.0 mg/l. The outflow from the reactor consisted of a suspension of black tellurium particles. The particles could be easily separated by filtration. An integrated biosorption–bioreduction process was developed and operated as outlined in In India, the production of cadmium telluride solar photovoltaic cells has started recently. During manufacture, some modules are rejected, while others may become a disposal problem after reaching the end of their useful life. Such modules are presently disposed off in landfill sites. Legal constraints on waste discharge may prohibit such operations in future. Further, metals like silver and tellurium are expensive and have to be recycled. The integrated biosorption–bioreduction process described in this paper has the potential of becoming both, economical and efficient for the removal of tellurium from such wastes. The authors thank the Director, Agharkar Research Institute for all the help and facilities provided. JMR is thankful to ARI for providing financial assistance.