The original target utilization is only about 30% in the CIGS (Cu(In, Ga)Se2) thin film solar cell sputtering process. The remaining 70% of the target must be recycled to achieve sustainable use of the rare metals, In, Ga, and Se. It is therefore very important to establish spent CIGS target recycling technology to reduce environmental damage.
                  High CIGS recovery was obtained in this study by autoclave leaching CIGS powder in a sulfate solution using H2O2 as the strong oxidant. The CIGS leaching mechanism was studied using XRD and SEM. H2O2 was first adsorbed onto the CIGS surface. Then copper–selenium compound was formed on the CIGS surface. The copper–selenium compound decomposition is the rate-controlling step in the CIGS leaching process. Nearly complete CIGS dissolution can be obtained by autoclave leaching at 140°C for 4h using 3M H2SO4 as the leaching agent and H2O2 as the oxidant. In this study, a direct recycling process combining leaching process and re-synthesis of CIGS nanoparticles was developed to recover CIGS materials for reinsertion into the CIGS supply chain. Mono-dispersed CIGS nano-particles with the mean particle size of 9nm can be obtained using spent CIGS target as raw materials.CuIn Hydrometallurgy has been used to extract the valuable metals over the years due to the advantages of cheap energy cost, less air pollution, easy material handling and less dust and waste disposal. Leaching is one of the most essential front-end operations in hydrometallurgy. The aim of leaching is to dissolve the valuable minerals in the concentrate using a lixiviating agent aqueous solution CIGS leaching was performed in this study using H In the present scenario, most of recycling and recovery methods are based on the hydrometallurgical processes, which recover metals such as copper, indium, gallium from the spent CIGS. In this study, a direct recycling process combining leaching process and re-synthesis of CIGS nanoparticles was developed to recover CIGS materials for reinsertion into the CIGS supply chain with little or no additional processing. CIGS quaternary alloy sputtering targets were obtained from Bosin Technology Co. Ltd. for use in this study. The chemical composition of the CIGS target was determined using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) as shown in A summary of the autoclave leaching experiments is given in After leaching the samples were centrifuged and washed with deionized water, followed by centrifugation again. The washed powders were dried at 80 After autoclave leaching 0.9 The sample XRD patterns after autoclave leaching at 140   An increase in the temperature promotes H  Adsorption of H Oxidation and decomposition of CIGS (Cu Oxidation of selenium ions Oxidation and decomposition of copper-rich CIGS Oxidation and decomposition of copper–selenium compound The schematic diagram of the CIGS leaching mechanism is shown in   After leaching at 140 The CIGS oxidative leaching mechanism in H The decomposition of copper–selenium compound is the rate-controlling step in the CIGS leaching process. Adding H The optimum conditions of CIGS leaching were determined as below: 0.15 Mono-dispersed, near stoichiometric CIGS nano-particles with the mean particle size of 9 This work was financially co-sponsored by the Headquarters of University Advancement at the