YBO3 and H–Ln BO3 (Ln=La, Nd, Sm, and Eu) orthoborates have been prepared by an original sol–gel mineral process. This synthesis method over solid state reaction offers the possibility of obtaining high quality materials at low temperatures, without parasitic phases. Luminescent europium ions have been used as structural probes to investigate these orthoborate phases. Due to the purities of the different powders the symmetries of the europium ion in the different matrices have been determined unambiguously and a comparison between the luminescence results and the structural descriptions given in the literature has been realized.Over the last few years, intensive research has been devoted to the realisation of efficient luminescent materials due to the versatility of their applications in the field of the fluorescent lamps, display devices, detector system represented by X-ray screens and scintillators of phosphor marking. The borates have proved to be potential candidates for the aforementioned applications. The present tendency of development of such materials is not oriented especially towards new phases but mostly towards a better knowledge and a better control of the microstructures and resulting optical properties of existing materials. Among the parameters, which govern the luminescence efficiency, the method of preparation of these materials has been shown by experience, to be the most significant and important. It is well established that wet processes such as sol–gel mineral, offer the possibility in comparison with solid state reactions of obtaining high quality materials without parasitic phases YBO Luminescent europium ion has been used as a structural probe to investigate these orthoborate phases. Due to the high quality of the samples prepared by the mineral sol–gel process, the site symmetries of the europium ions in the different matrices have been determined unambiguously and a comparison between luminescent results and the structural descriptions given in the literature have been made. Orthoborate phases have been prepared by a mineral sol–gel method developed in our laboratory X-ray diffraction (XRD), high temperature XRD, thermal characterisation and infra-red spectroscopy (IRS) have been used to confirm the purity and the high quality of the powdered orthoborates prepared by this mineral sol–gel route. Analysis of the room temperature XRD powder patterns was carried out for the borate samples prepared by the sol–gel mineral process and classical solid state reaction. The stability of the LnBO H–NdBO Similar observations have been made for europium and samarium orthoborates where only the vaterite phase appears above 750°C. In the case of the neodymium and lanthanum samples, the simultaneous presence of the phases H–LnBO IR spectroscopy was carried out with the objective of specifying the coordination of boron in the YBO The global time resolved emission spectra (TRS) shown in The revision of the crystal structure of H–EuBO Recently, the vaterite form of orthoborate has been described in a rhombohedral subcell by analysis of electron diffraction patterns of the isostructural vaterite GdBO YBO