The geometry of calcium carbonate (CaCO3)/polymer hybrid crystals was investigated by means of the contrast variation small angle neutron scattering. Our sophisticated contrast variation method led to decomposition of the measured scattering intensities into partial scattering functions of each component. These decomposed partial scattering functions gave detailed information on each component in the hybrid particle. Especially, on the basis of the Babinet principle (or incompressibility hypothesis), the comparison of the cross terms led to the relationships of each scattering amplitude. In this way, we could determine the geometry of the hybrid crystals in detail.It is well known that biological systems synthesize highly advanced and optimized inorganic–organic hybrid materials such as bones, teeth, shells, etc. The process of formation of these inorganic–based structures is called biomineralization. The interest of biomineralization has expanded quickly, and the studies now also include the range from biomimetic materials chemistry to supramolecular chemistry nowadays, where the paradigm is based on the higher levels of organization and dynamics of molecular-interactions. However, the mineralization process is still poorly understood and a challenge for scientific research Neutron scattering techniques may have a chance to make important contributions to this problem, since small angle neutron scattering (SANS) allows in many cases the characterization of complex structures on a mesoscopic scale by applying the contrast variation technique with hydrogen/deuterium substitution. In this article calcium carbonate (CaCO CaCO To investigate the geometry of the polymer in CaCO The scattering amplitude of component In summary, we performed small angle neutron scattering experiments applying a sophisticated contrast variation scheme, which led to decomposition of the obtained scattering data into the partial scattering functions of each component. We could understand the relationships of each scattering amplitude by the comparison of the partial scattering functions and thus determined the geometry of the CaCO This research was supported by a grant from Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (Grant No. COE3MP) and by the Max Planck Society. M. Heiderich is acknowledged for his experimental support at KWS1, FZ-Jülich. Th. Goldschmidt AG, Essen, Germany is acknowledged for the generous gift of PEG-P