The Äspö Pillar Stability Experiment (APSE) is an in situ experiment for investigating the spalling mechanism under mechanical and thermal loading conditions in a crystalline rock. In this study, the thermo-mechanical behaviors in the APSE were investigated with three models: (1) a Full model with rough meshes for calculating the influence of tunnel excavation; (2) a Submodel with fine meshes for predicting the thermo-mechanical behavior in the pillar during the borehole drilling, heating, and cooling phases; and (3) a Thin model for modeling the effect of slot cutting for de-stressing around the pillar. In order to import the stresses calculated from the Full model to the Submodel and to define the complex thermal boundary conditions, artificial neural networks (NNs) were utilized. From this study, it was possible to conclude that the stepwise approach with the application of NNs was useful for predicting the complex response of the pillar under severe thermo-mechanical loading conditions.Task B in the DECOVALEX-2011 project based on the Äspö Pillar Stability Experiment (APSE) performed by the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Corporation (SKB) was for investigating the spalling strength of a granitic rock mass under thermal and mechanical loading conditions and the effect of confining pressures effect on the rock failure. In the case of crystalline rock, the rock mass spalling strength was reported to frequently occur between 0.4 and 0.6 of the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) ( The APSE is being modeled by the research teams participating in the DECOVALEX-2011 project, which was started in 2008. The Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) joined the project as one of the eight funding organizations and participated as a research team for the Task B, which deals with the APSE. In this study, the spalling of rock related to the tunnel and borehole excavations, heat generation, and confining pressure was predicted with three-dimensional (3D) modelings using FLAC Such a stepwise approach from a rough to fine model and from large to small area was required to simulate the APSE, in which the following factors need to be considered all together: In situ stresses and stress redistribution after tunnel excavation. Stress redistribution due to borehole excavation. Influence of confining pressure of 700 Spalling around the borehole. Thermal stress change during heating and cooling. Possible influence of excavation damaged zone (EDZ) and shear zone. Development of failure zone due to distressing. Finally, the spalling strength of in situ rock under overburden load, thermal stress, and artificial confining pressure was tried to be estimated based on the comparison of site observation of spalling and prediction from computer simulations. The APSE was suggested to evaluate the understanding of rock mass strength at the scale of the emplacement borehole when the dominant mode of failure was expected to be stress-induced fracturing on the boundary of the excavation ( The excavation of the boreholes, separated by the 1 Typically, the tunnels and boreholes in a high-level radioactive waste repository will be buffered and backfilled with swelling bentonite. Swelling pressure will be developed as the bentonite becomes saturated and is applied to the rock walls. In order to consider the swelling pressure on the borehole surface in the experiment, a rubber bladder approximately 1.75 The pillar was heated with the electrical heaters installed in four 6.5 A V-shaped notch was formed and migrated down the borehole. The initiation of brittle failure was purely tensile. When the heaters had been turned off and the rock mass had cooled down, approximately 0.1 The total opening angle of the notch on the pillar was approximately 130° when the notch was fully developed. The breakout angle was changed from 15° to 40° and the mean was 32°. Spalling was observed at the depth from 0.5 The maximum notch depth of about 150 The rock cores from the 76 In this study, FLAC In order to accurately predict the spalling behavior in the thermal and mechanical loading conditions, it is necessary to consider the effects of excavation as well as the thermal loading by using a Full model with fine meshes. Running a 3D model with fine meshes in full scale is ineffective because it needs a large memory size and a long calculation time. In this study, a stepwise approach was utilized with a Full model, which can calculate the effect of tunnel excavation, and a Submodel with fine meshes.  In order to model the effect of slot cutting for de-stressing around the pillar, in which high stress was concentrated after tunnel and borehole excavation, as well as thermal stress, very fine meshes were used around the borehole and pillar. In the Thin model, only two layers were included as shown in  In the Full model, the in situ stress condition measured at Äspö HRL was implemented in the model. The best estimation of the stress tensor could be made by comparing the measured convergence with the computed convergence as well as the stress measurements in the vicinity of the APSE by The physical, mechanical, and thermal properties of Äspö rock listed in The rock was considered to be homogeneous, elastic, and isotropic and the thermal expansion and conduction properties of the rock were constant. The EDZ of 0.5 The initial temperature distribution before the excavation was calculated with the geothermal gradient of 3 In both models, boundaries except the ground surface were fixed and assumed to be adiabatic. After the tunnel excavation and during the heating phase, the rock temperature distribution around the tunnel and boreholes was calculated in consideration of the heat convection effect through the rock surface. In the model, a heat convection factor of 10 When the heating phase was modeled with the recorded power input, the temperatures on the right-hand side were higher than those on the left-hand side as listed in In this study, back-propagation ( Determine the input parameters, which can affect the outputs. Extract input and output data from the Full model. Design a network with an adequate number of hidden nodes. There is no formula to determine how many hidden nodes are best for a network, because it is largely dependent upon the complexity of the problem being solved. One rule of thumb is to use the average of the number of inputs and the number of the output nodes ( Train the network by using a part of the data sets consisted of inputs and outputs. Check the training results, and if the training results are not desirable, adjustment should be done on the network structure. When the training is completed, testing should be done with other data sets, which are not used in the training for validating the performance of the network. When the testing is reliable, the network can be used for prediction. One of the two NNs used in this study is Stress-net, which was for calculating the initial stress distribution of the Submodel. Since the Submodel is for a limited range in the floor, the effect of tunnel excavation cannot be simulated. It is, therefore, necessary to import the stresses after the tunnel excavation from the Full model. The stress components, From the Full model, 762 data sets were extracted and among them 500 sets were used for training and the other 262 were used for testing. With 5 hidden nodes, the network could be trained successfully. The stress components at over 292,500 zones could be determined with the Stress-net much quicker than the implemented interpolation function in the code. Another important advantage using the network is that the network can be used without any further adjustment or extra training, even though there are changes in the mesh size, model size, or model geometry.  For a better prediction of the temperatures and the thermo-mechanical responses of the rock, it is better to utilize the measured temperatures on the borehole surface as boundary conditions. In the APSE, the temperatures on the borehole surface were measured at several locations at different depths. Because there are a limited number of measuring points around the holes, the complete distribution of temperature all around the borehole surface should be estimated indirectly with the help of modeling. From the Full model, it is possible to observe that the temperature distribution on the hole surface depends on the depth and the rotation angle, In this study, a NN, Temp-net, was developed for describing the complex temperature distribution all around the borehole surface. The ratios between the temperature at 3.5 From the computer simulation, 500 data sets containing temperature, depth, and angle were derived. Among them, 300 data sets were used for training the network. When the training was completed, testing followed with the rest 200 data sets.  The stress increase around the boreholes after the borehole excavation could result in rock fracturing. Since the model was elastic and thus, a FISH routine for estimating the development of failure zone was made and implemented in the model. The FISH routine can check the stress distribution and define the zones, where the tangential stress is over the spalling strength, as possible failure zones. Two spalling strengths, 110   In order to estimate the spalling strength, the notch depths and breakout angles predicted from the cases with different strengths were compared with the measurements. The breakout angle is compared in The radial displacements during the heating phase at the locations, where LVDTs were installed, were calculated and plotted in Since the initial stress and strain conditions in the Thin model were imported from the Submodel, the comparison of the major parameters such as the principal stress, displacement, and failed zone is important for getting reliable results from the Thin model. After confirming the initial condition of the Thin model, slot cutting was simulated by removing the meshes step by step for releasing the stress acting on the pillar as shown in The stress paths during the de-stressing at 4 different locations at 1  In this study, a stepwise modeling using three different models: (1) Full model; (2) Submodel; (3) Thin model, was carried out for understanding the complex thermo-mechanical behavior of rock mass observed at APSE. Such a stepwise approach from a rough- to fine-meshed model and from large to small model size was effective to simulate an in situ experiment, in which many factors in different scales need to be considered together. The stress redistribution after the tunnel excavation was calculated using the Full model. EDZ around the tunnel could be implemented in the Full model. The influence of borehole excavation, confining pressure of 700 From the study, the following conclusions could be drawn: With the submodeling using the Submodel and the Thin model, it is possible to model the borehole size, pillar geometry, heater locations, and measuring points more precisely. Submodeling can be carried out efficiently using the NNs to calculate the stress and temperature at certain locations. With using a higher specific heat and thermal conductivity of rock mass, it will be possible to reduce the difference in the temperatures between measurements and computer simulations. Comparison of notch depth and length, and breakout angle is useful for estimating the spalling strength. From the study, the spalling strength is found to be 120 Thin model can simulate the de-stressing, but the rock failure does not match with measurement. Rock property change in the floor will result in better prediction of notch depth. Thinner model mesh around the boreholes is recommended for better prediction of notch length. From this study, a unique technique utilizing NNs for a stepwise computer simulation from a large model to a small model was developed and successfully applied to model the complex thermo-mechanical coupling behaviors observed in APSE. For future works, it is recommended to develop a technique for mutual exchange of the results from the continuum code and those from a particle code such as PFC, which is good for more realistic modeling of the rock fracture generation. The work described in this paper was conducted within the context of the international DECOVALEX Project (DEvelopment of COupled models and their VALidation against EXperiments). The work was supported by Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) as one of the Funding Organizations of the project, through the Nuclear Research and Development Program of KOSEF with a grant funded by The views expressed in the paper are, however, those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the Funding Organizations. The work was coordinated by Dr. Christer Andersson from Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Co. (SKB), Sweden. The data used in this work were provided by SKB through its Äspö Pillar Stability Experiment project.