The evolution of microstructure and texture after heavy cold-rolling and annealing was investigated in FCC equiatomic medium to high entropy alloys. For this purpose medium entropy ternary CoFeNi and quaternary CoCrFeNi, and high entropy quinary CoCrFeMnNi alloys were cold-rolled to 90% reduction in thickness and annealed at different temperatures. The ternary alloy showed the development of lamellar microstructure and pure metal type texture after heavy cold-rolling. In contrast, the quaternary and quinary alloys showed heavily fragmented microstructure and brass dominated texture. After annealing, the ternary alloy showed abnormal grain growth at lower annealing temperatures and strengthening of the cube component ({001}<100>) with increasing annealing temperature. In contrast, the quinary and quaternary alloys showed more homogenous grain growth and only minor changes in the volume fraction of different texture components during annealing. The observed differences in the microstructure and texture formation during cold-rolling could be understood considering the differences in the stacking fault energy of the three alloys. On the other hand, the evolution of microstructure and texture of the quarternary and quinary alloys was affected by the sluggish diffusion behavior.High entropy alloys (HEAs) are multicomponent alloys based on the novel alloy design philosophy of mixing a large number of elements in equiatomic or near equiatomic proportions Depending on the entropy of mixing, HEAs are defined as those having at least five elements, while alloys containing three to four elements in equiatomic proportion may be classified as medium entropy alloys An important area of research in HEAs is understanding the thermo-mechanical processing behavior of these alloys The equiatomic FCC ternary, quaternary and quinary alloys used in the present investigation were prepared by vacuum arc melting and casting route. The as-cast alloys were subjected to homogenization treatment at 1100 °C for 6 h (hrs). The three homogenized alloys showed typical coarse microstructure of cast alloys. In order to break down the cast microstructures, samples with dimensions 25 mm (length)×8 mm (width)×5 mm (thickness) were obtained from the respective homogenized bars and cold-rolled to 50% reduction in thickness (∼2.5 mm) using a laboratory scale rolling equipment with roll diameter 140 mm (SPX Precision instrument, Fenn Division, USA). These cold-rolled samples of the three alloys were annealed at 800 °C for 1 h (h) in a salt-bath furnace. The fully annealed samples of the three alloys were used as the starting materials for further thermo-mechanical processing. These were subjected to cold-rolling up to ∼90% reduction in thickness (final thickness ∼ 250 μm). The deformation was carried out in steps of 20%, 40%, 60% and 80% reduction in thickness (with respect to the starting thickness ∼2.5 mm). However, due to significant strain-hardening, 90% reduction in thickness was achieved using small incremental deformation in each pass. About 10 to 11 passes were required to achieve the total 90% reduction in thickness. Small rectangular samples were obtained from the 90% cold-rolled sheets of the three alloys and were isochronally annealed for 1 h at temperatures ranging from 700 °C to 1000 °C. The crystal structure analysis of the different alloys was carried out by X-ray diffraction (Make: PANalytical, The Netherlands; Model: X'Pert PRO) using Cu-K The EBSD scans were acquired using the AztecHKL software (Oxford Instruments, UK). For deformed samples, scan step size of 0.04–0.05 μm was used. For annealed samples the step size varied between 0.20 μm and 4.0 μm. The acquired EBSD dataset were exported to the TSL-OIM The melting behavior of the three alloys was characterized by a differential scanning calorimeter (Make: NETZSCH, Germany, Model: DSC 404). The measurements were carried out under a flowing high purity argon atmosphere using a heating rate of 10  °C min The XRD plots of the three homogenized starting materials are shown in The development of microstructure after heavy cold-rolling is shown in The φ The deformation textures of the three alloys following 90% cold-rolling are compared in  The variation of key microstructural parameters with annealing temperature is shown in The development of texture in the ternary alloy after annealing could be understood by analyzing the relevant ODF sections ( The development of recrystallization texture in the quaternary alloy ( The variation of volume fractions of different texture components with annealing time is shown in It may be noted that addition of Co systematically decreases the SFE of Ni, while addition of Fe does not change the SFE of Ni (∼130 mJ m The microstructure of the ternary alloy shows lamellar banded structure ( Deformation twins in low SFE materials can have important implications for microstructural refinement in addition to affecting the evolution of deformation texture. Low SFE alloys processed by different severe plastic deformation techniques have been investigated and the mechanism of additional microstructural refinement by conversion of deformation TBs into random HAGBs (through accumulation of dislocation) has been highlighted The average recrystallized grain size in the three alloys indicates important differences. The much greater resistance to grain growth of the quinary alloy as compared to the ternary alloy is clearly demonstrated by the much lower grain size of this alloy even at a much higher homologous temperatures ( A further point of interest is the abnormal grain growth in the ternary alloy after annealing at 800 °C but not after annealing at higher temperatures. This observation is in good agreement with that of Wu et al. The recrystallization texture of the ternary alloy shows differences with the other two alloys, differentiated mainly by the presence of a discernible cube component which is strengthened with increasing annealing temperature. The development of a strong cube component is well-known in heavily cold-rolled and annealed low to medium SFE materials The recrystallization texture of the quaternary and quinary alloys show evident similarities. The recrystallization textures of the two materials are characterized by the development of the α-fiber orientations and retention of deformation texture components (e.g. S component). The retention of deformation texture components is possible in two ways, namely prolonged recovery and primary/discontinuous recrystallization without strong preference for orientation selection. However, discontinuous recrystallization rather than extended recovery remains the primary softening mechanism in the low SFE HEAs An interesting point is that the quaternary and quinary alloys do not show the presence of strong BR component, unlike low SFE brass The quaternary and quinary alloys further show interesting similarities in the form of minor variations in the volume fractions of different texture components with annealing temperature. This points to comparable growth rate of different texture components. It may be noted that the preferential growth of texture components, proposed as a mechanism for the evolution of strong recrystallization texture, involves preferential migration of selected boundaries. This requires rapid diffusivity of atoms across the boundaries. As already discussed, the quinary HEA shows remarkably sluggish diffusion behavior In summary, the ternary alloy shows distinctly different microstructure and texture formation during deformation and annealing as compared to the quaternary or quinary alloys. The observed differences in the deformation microstructure and texture could be related to the expected SFEs of the three alloys. On the other hand, the increasing number of components strengthens the sluggish diffusion behavior in quaternary and quinary alloys, which leads to more homogenous growth of microstructure and different texture components during annealing.  The ternary alloy shows lamellar microstructure and pure metal type texture in contrast to the fragmented microstructure and brass dominated texture in quaternary and quinary alloys. The differences in deformation microstructure and texture could be attributed to the expected higher SFE of the ternary alloy as compared to the other two alloys. The quinary alloy shows much greater resistance to grain growth as compared to the quaternary and ternary alloys. This is related to the increasing sluggish diffusion which increases with the increasing number of components. The annealing texture of the ternary alloy shows the presence of the cube component in conformity with the relatively high SFE of this alloy. The {236}<385> or {113}<332> components are not particularly strong in the annealing texture of the quaternary and quinary alloys, unlike conventional low SFE brass. In addition, more homogenous growth and minor changes in the volume fractions of different texture components indicate absence of strong preferential nucleation or growth in the quaternary and quinary alloys. The authors gratefully acknowledge Professor J.W. Yeh, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan for kindly providing the starting alloys. Financial support of