Temporal Dominance of Sensations (TDS) and Temporal Check-all-that-apply (TCATA) are fast and dynamic descriptive techniques for sensory characterization of food. The temporal perception involved during the consumption of reformulated meat products are rarely considered and, in this context, the aim of the present work was to evaluate the influence of salt and fat reduction on Bologna sausage with addition of emulsion gel in the dynamic sensorial perception by using TDS and TCATA methods considering overall liking. After the dynamic sensory characterization tasks, consumers rated their liking using a 9-point hedonic scale. The findings showed that fat and salt reduction, and the addition of emulsion gels as fat replacers affected the sensory characteristics of the Bologna sausages. Regarding the methods, both studies collected the variations between samples with a great correlation between data. The TDS and TCATA curves revealed that texture attributes (firm and soft) were dominant at the beginning of the evaluation for all samples. TCATA also showed that juicy was dominant in the first 15 s of eating period. Related to overall liking, control sample (2% salt and 20% pork back fat) presented the highest scores (7.25 for TDS and 7.24 for TCATA) and Bolognas sausages with emulsion gels and reduced in salt were less accepted (4.95 for TDS and 5.86 for TCATA). Bologna flavor was the major attribute related to liking and fat flavor the main driver of disliking. Results from the present work suggest that dynamic sensorial methods are effective tools to characterize reformulated meat products.Meat products are important source of protein, minerals, and vitamins and some of these nutrients (e.g., iron, vitamin B12, and folic acid) are either not present or have inferior bioavailability in other foods. Due to the association of meat products intake and some chronic diseases, such as cancer, obesity and cardiovascular diseases ( In recent decades, it became possible to develop new meat products with potential health benefits ( Food perception is a multisensory phenomenon, reflecting the combination of taste along the in-mouth transformation, the release of olfactory compounds during food breakdown, and other sensory information into a perceived property of the food, rather than a collection of individual sensory attributes ( Several temporal sensory methods are available for dynamic sensory characterization ( The main difference between the two methods is the concept of dominance, which is essential to TDS. When assessor focus in a dominant attribute, simultaneous perception of others sensory characteristics is not captured by TDS method. On the other hand TCATA allows assessor to mark two or more attributes during evaluation, and thus a more complete description of how the sensory characteristics of products change over time may be provided ( In this context, the aim of the present work was to evaluate the influence of salt and fat reduction on Bologna sausages with inulin-based emulsion gels in the dynamic sensorial perception by using TDS and TCATA methods considering overall liking. Inulin-based emulsion gel (EG) was formulated with 29.5% of a soy protein isolate (SPI) suspension (11.9% w/w SPI in water) (pH 6.2–7, at least 90% of protein, Supro® 596 IP, Dupont do Brasil, Brazil) to obtain a final concentration of soy protein of 4% w/w in the EG, 50% soybean oil (SBO) (Liza®), and 16.5% inulin (IN) (pH 5–7, max 10 DP, ORAFTI GR, Clariant, USA). Before emulsion formation, SPI dispersions were heated at 70 °C for 5 min in a water bath to partially denature the protein and to induce gelation. Samples were then stored in a fridge at 4 °C for 14 h until the EG elaboration. EG was prepared in a homogenizer (Thermomix TM 31, Vorwerk España M.S.L., S.C, Madrid, Spain) as described in our previous study ( Bologna sausages were produced in the Meat and Meat Products Laboratory at University of Campinas, SP, Brazil. Mechanically deboned chicken meat (68.37 ± 0.29% moisture, 16.59 ± 0.24% lipids, 14.39 ± 1.09% protein, and 1.19 ± 0.05% ash), Pork ( Reduced salt and/or fat Bologna sausages formulations were prepared according to Consumers including students, staff, and campus visitors were recruited through flyers, e-mails, and social networks. For TDS test, the Bolognas sausages were evaluated by 61 untrained consumers, and for TCATA the test was performed by 68 consumers, aged 18–56. From total consumers, approximately 30% men and 70% women. The selection criterion was the regular consumption of Bologna sausage, at least once per week. After each evaluation, participants received a gift. Sensory analyses were performed at the Sensory Analysis Laboratory of Food Technology Department of the Institute of Food Engineering (FEA) of UNICAMP. Samples (approx. 3 g) were served in the temperature range of 5–10 °C in plastic containers, labeled with three-digit random numbers and presented in a sequential monadic way, following a balanced presentation order ( The attributes used were defined by Kelly's repertory grid technique ( The test was performed as presented previously in the literature ( TCATA was performed according to previous studies ( After dynamic evaluation, consumers were asked to taste again Bologna samples and to evaluate the overall liking using a 9-point structured hedonic scale (1 = dislike very much, 9 = like very much) ( The sample’s TDS curves were plotted as proposed by TCATA data were evaluated according Liking scores have been analyzed using an ANOVA with product and subject as factors. Tukey's test was used at the 5% level of significance using trial version of Statistica 13 (Statsoft®, Dell software, Califórnia, EUA). The results of TDS and TCATA data were analyzed by aggregating responses over a specific time period ( In order to identify the main (positive or negative) drivers of liking, the penalty-lift analysis was run on the CATA-coded TDS or TCATA data and the averages of the temporal liking scores ( TDS smoothed curves are shown in The TDS data showed that the texture attributes (firm or soft) were the first dominant perceptions for all samples, which is in accordance with previous studies ( Among samples, saltiness was significant only in normal salt ones (NF-PF/NS, RF-EG/NS, and RF-PFEG/NS) ( The attribute Bologna flavor in samples with only pork back fat as a source of fat (NF-PF/NS and NF-PF/RS) prevailed for a longer time than in others samples, about 27 s in NF-PF/NS and 20 s in NF-PF/RS. Probably that happens due to salt and fat reduction in the reformulated sample. Previous studies have reported the importance of the salt and animal fat to enhance the flavor of meat products (  A significant citation proportion of Bologna flavor in samples with addition of emulsion gel (RF-EG/NS, RF-PFEG/NS, RF-EG/RS, and RF-PFEG/RS) showed that this strategy of reformulation preserved this important attribute characteristic of Bologna sausage. A higher citation proportion of this attribute was perceived in normal salt samples ( According the results obtained in TDS test, saltiness was not the most cited attribute for all samples (except for RF-EG/NS), an interesting and important result for meat scientist and meat industry who constantly works to make these products healthier. Soft texture attribute had the highest citation proportion in reduced salt samples (NF-PF/RS, RF-EG/RS, and RF-PFEG/RS) mainly in the first half of eating period, in accordance with TDS data. It is worth mentioning that sample RF-EG/RS presented two opposite texture attributes, firm and soft, at the beginning of the product comminution. For NF-PF/RS juicy was used more frequently to describe this sample compared to the average citation frequency of juicy to describe the other treatments during eating period. Significant differences in average overall liking scores between samples were found (p < 0.05). Control sample presented the highest scores and Bolognas sausages with emulsion gels and reduced in salt were less accepted ( Consumers do not detect the difference between control sausages and RF-PFEG/NS sample (p > 0.05). Furthermore, sample with emulsion gel and with 2% of salt were judged acceptable with scores between 6.0 and 7.0, which represent a range from ‘‘liked slightly’’ (6) to ‘‘liked moderately (7). Comparing the overall liking evaluation obtained from different dynamic methods (TDS and TCATA) for the same samples scores were statistically different just for samples RF-EG/RS and RF-PFEG/RS, where data from TCATA presented higher scores. This result may be due the differences between methodologies to acquire data, while consumer was focused in the attribute that caught their attention (maybe a dislike attribute) during TDS evaluation resulting in lower scores, selecting several attribute at the same time during TCATA analysis increased the scores. The penalty-lift analysis presented in Results for texture attributes were the most different between the methods. Soft attribute was a driver of disliking during the first half of the evaluation (P1 and P2) on TDS data, while TCATA data showed the opposite. The selection of the attribute firm during P1 and P3 was related with consumer overall liking on TCATA data. In contrast, during these periods it was a driver of disliking on TDS data. Penalty-lift analysis shown that was possible to identify the drivers of liking based on dynamic sensory profiles. This analysis had the advantage of considering individual data to detect the drivers of liking and allowed the use of statistical methods to test their significance ( The correspondence analysis based on aggregated TDS and TCATA data by periods of the evaluation, and their correlation with overall liking scores is shown in Sample with EG and with 2% of salt (RF-EG/NS) was more related to the attribute firm, in accordance with a previous study of Bologna with addition of pre-emulsion composed of fish, canola and olive oil as fat replacer (  TDS and TCATA successfully determined the temporal sensory profiling of the reduced salt and fat Bolognas sausages with emulsion gels, with good discrimination and similarity among them. Additionally, results also showed that both methods complement each other. Whereas the multiple selections of attributes during TCATA evaluation provides a more complete description of how the sensory characteristics of products change over time, TDS enable to evaluate the ability of sensory attributes to capture consumers' attention. TDS and TCATA data showed that the texture attributes (firm and soft) were the first dominant perceptions for all samples; however, TCATA would bring additional information where interaction between attributes is required, firm, soft and juicy in our case, and allows representing more than two attributes at any point in time. Saltiness was significant in TDS evaluation only at the end of mastication process, and it was not the most cited attribute in TCATA data. The main driver of liking and disliking were Bologna flavor and fat flavor respectively, suggesting that future studies aiming to mask fat flavor would improve overall linking of reformulated Bologna sausages. This study also shows that consumers successfully characterize the dynamic sensory profile of Bologna, an important result, because in general trained panelists are used to evaluate dynamic descriptive techniques. Whereas dynamic methods describe the sample's sensory properties in a more realistic way and the lack of information in this field in the area of meat products, TDS and TCATA shown to be an interesting tool to describe the sensorial profile of these products. Therefore, meat processors should consider temporal sensory methods as a strategic tool during the development of optimization of meat product formulations  The authors thank CNPq, CAPES, and FAPESP (process numbers 140531/2015-7, 88881.135401/2016-01, and 2016/ 19967-7, respectively) for the financial support to this work and scholarships. The authors would like to thank Wanessa Ribeiro, Andrea Paola, Giseli Magalhães, and Maristela Ozaki for their help in analysis. Adriano Gomes da Cruz and Erick Almeida Esmerino also are grateful to Fundação de Amparo a Pesquisa do Rio de Janeiro (FAPERJ).