Tungsten is an economically important metal with diverse applications ranging from wear resistant cutting tools to its use in specialized steels and alloys. Concerns about its supply security have been raised by various studies in literature, mostly due to trade disputes arising from supply concentration and exports restrictions in China and its lack of viable substitutes. Although tungsten material flows have been analysed for specific regions, a global mass flow analysis of tungsten is still missing in literature and its global supply chain remains opaque for industry outsiders. The objective of this paper is to create a map of global tungsten flows to highlight and discuss key material efficiency (i.e., using less of a material to make a product or supply a service, or reducing the material entering production but ending up in waste) and supply security opportunities along tungsten’s supply chain that could be incorporated into the planning and prioritization of future supply security strategies. The results indicate the existence of various intervention alternatives that could help to broaden the supply base and improve the overall material efficiency of the system. In particular, future policy and research and development (R&D) efforts to improve tungsten’s material efficiency should focus on minimizing tungsten losses as fine particles during beneficiation and extraction (current global losses estimated at 10–40%), as well as on evaluating alternatives to improve recycling collection systems and technologies, which could lead to 17–45% more tungsten discards being recycled into new products.The high rate of technological evolution experienced in the world during the last three decades has resulted in the development of increasingly complex products that employ intricate material mixes. Combined with population and economic growth across the world, this has generated a rapid growth in demand for many mineral commodities that were previously not produced in large amounts. For example, 713 million smartphones were shipped globally in 2012, an increase of 44.1% over 2011 ( Tungsten’s unique properties include the highest melting point, the lowest coefficient of thermal expansion and the lowest vapour pressure of any non-alloyed metal ( Numerous security of supply strategies are discussed in literature (as exemplified by the summary presented in Table S1 of the supplementary information); some of the most common being mineral resource exploration incentives for supply diversification, material substitution, recycling systems and technological improvement, material re-use and waste reduction. However, the authors believe that the potential development and application of such approaches is usually hindered by the lack of transparency and data availability that exists across the supply chain of these materials, which limits the analysis of each strategy’s potential material benefits and overall economic and technical feasibility. This is also a difficulty for tungsten, as evidenced by a recent study of data needs for mass flow analysis (MFA) relating to 21 raw materials ( The objective of this paper is to create a global mass flow analysis of tungsten to discuss key supply security opportunities where intervention could be most effective in broadening the supply base and improving the material efficiency of the system. Such a map could work as reference material for the planning and prioritization of future supply security strategies for tungsten based on criteria such as prospective material gains, investment requirements and economic certainty/motivation, existing technological readiness, geological knowledge and understanding of potential new deposits, research and development capacity and sustainability performance. This study is also expected to contribute to tungsten’s supply chain transparency by gathering the scarce public information that exists on this material and complementing it with new unpublished insights obtained by the authors through a stakeholder consultation process. The assumptions that underlie this analysis are discussed further in the next section. This section describes the tool employed to carry out the global mass flow analysis of tungsten (Section The Sankey diagram has been adopted as the visualisation tool employed to present the mass flows of tungsten in this paper. Sankey diagrams applied to mass flows help to highlight inefficiencies and potential savings in connection with material use by illustrating quantitative information about flows, their relationships and their transformations, as suggested by The mass flow analysis presented in this paper displays the allocation of tungsten across its supply chain by following the mining–manufacturing–use route, in addition to recycling and re-use flows and the points where material losses occur. The Sankey diagram shows the total amount of materials that were extracted, processed and used in 2010, but does not indicate the accumulated natural and anthropogenic material stocks available for human exploitation. The thickness of the flows are proportional to the amount of mass in each of them (i.e., the thickness of each link represents the magnitude of flux) and the mass balance is maintained along the diagram. Therefore, all tungsten entering and leaving the system is accounted for and any mass balance irregularities due to losses or inefficiencies are intuitively displayed ( Tungsten rarely exists in a pure state along the system, therefore, vertical divisions (slices) along the flows indicate where important transformative processes occur. They are accompanied by an indication of the resulting material forms and the amount of energy (including both electricity and fuel converted to kWh units) that is consumed during each transformation per unit mass, to provide an insight into their environmental cost. Additional resources and emissions involved during these material transformation processes (e.g. water, chemicals or gas emissions) have not been included due to lack of suitable data. Color is used to distinguish the different tungsten grades contained in each flow (i.e., to describe the typical tungsten concentration within the carrier materials in each flow). The tungsten Sankey diagram presented in this paper was populated using data from a variety of industrial and academic sources. In some cases the data had to be inferred, estimated or back-calculated if the direct values were not available. In order to overcome the problem of public data scarcity, a stakeholder consultation was performed through the organisation of a workshop named “Understanding the tungsten lifecycle in Europe” ( Table S2 in the Supplementary Information provides additional detailed information about the methods, data and assumptions applied to the mass flow analysis to support the explanations presented in this section and to help the reader to see overall characteristics of the estimation at a glance. The mass flow estimations can be divided into five categories, as follows:  Global mine production figures (given in metric tonnes of tungsten content), following ore beneficiation, are the starting point for the mass flow analysis building process. Global mine production data per country (67 The beneficiation recovery rate for the Mittersill tungsten mine in Austria has been estimated at 75–85% (  Based on data from  The construction of this section of the Sankey diagram involved three main steps: defining the structure and connections between its flow routes (part ‘a’), identifying relevant data and assumptions regarding the likely values for each flow (part ‘b’) and connecting these two pieces of information to back-calculate and estimate the final mass flows shown in this intermediate section of the Sankey diagram (part ‘c’). The flow structure and links depicted in the intermediate section (“Fabrication of intermediate products”) have been based on previous work by Mass allocation for the “Fabrication of intermediate products” section was based on the following evidence: The global distribution of finished sectors was obtained from Information about processing losses during each manufacturing step was initially obtained from the work of Two key assumptions have been made, based on the work from Connecting the information given in part ‘b’ above while following the structure described in part ‘a’ allowed the back-calculation and estimation of all the flows that form the “Fabrication of intermediate products” section: Considering a total consumption of 95 After considering all the data and assumptions explained until this point, four mass flows remain undefined: the exact amount of tungsten concentrate flowing to carbide production and steel and alloys production, as well as the amount of ferrotungsten and tungsten forms flowing to steel and alloys production. The values shown for these flows in  The purity of each flow specified in  The energy consumption of distinct processing steps has been obtained from  The resulting tungsten concentrate can either be used directly as an alloying element in steel or converted to intermediate tungsten compounds through hydrometallurgy (mostly to APT with a typical WO Secondary supply of end-of-life scrap is also incorporated into the supply chain presented in The supply chain presented in The following key messages have been highlighted in In 2010, China accounted for about 87% of all mine production. Tungsten’s beneficiation process leads to considerable losses (10–40% of the tungsten content of the ore may be lost). Processing losses during the fabrication of intermediate products are comparatively lower (<5%). In addition, nearly three quarters of all tungsten are processed through powder metallurgy and about half of total tungsten is used to manufacture carbide products. Roughly 25% of total tungsten supply came from end- of-life scrap in 2010. Based on their processing energies, tungsten recycling is less energy intensive than virgin production. The analysis of tungsten flows shown in Historical evidence suggests that China has not always been the dominant actor in the tungsten market. As shown in Several tungsten mining projects are under development worldwide, both for newly discovered deposits and for the reopening of dormant mines ( Known tungsten deposits occur in many countries of the world, as illustrated by The evidence described in this section suggests that it is possible to develop alternative supply chains; however these are subject to financing being available to open projects outside China, which depends on the perceptions of investors with regards to risks. Detailed discussions of the many factors that affect supply diversification are beyond the scope of this paper. Reducing the dominance of China in the supply of tungsten will require both time and appropriate policy efforts. Beneficiation losses are mostly attributed to the friable nature of tungsten minerals ( In the case of tungsten, mining represents a major cost. This is because the mining methods required to exploit underground vein-type deposits such as tungsten deposits are among the most expensive, as suggested by Fine tungsten particles are hard to capture by the most widely used separation methods and are commonly lost in slimes and tailings instead, from where it is even harder to recover the tungsten ( Multi- stage crushing and grinding has been suggested by The extraction of tungsten fine particles from tailings has been investigated by Tungsten’s high economic value tends to ensure its efficient use during manufacturing of intermediate and consumer products ( Tungsten recycling is not significantly constrained by technological availability, but rather by its use in some applications where recycling is not possible due to dispersion or dilution and by the lack of appropriate post-consumer collection systems.  In contrast, tungsten contained in ferrous and non-ferrous alloys with low tungsten fractions (cast steels, high-speed steels, tool steels, etc.) is not commonly recycled, as most of it is diluted during the recycling of steel, as suggested by Even more significant than dispersion and dilution, there seems to be a general consensus among industry members that the biggest limitation affecting tungsten recycling is the lack of appropriate post-consumer collection systems for open-loop recycling ( The energy estimates presented in Despite these energy savings, tungsten recycling is not necessarily cheaper than buying ore concentrate. Depending on market conditions, product fabrication through the virgin and recycled routes may have similar costs, as the cost of tungsten scrap may be even higher than that of tungsten concentrate (for example, ∼US$15,000 per tonne of carbide scrap [ This paper has mapped the global mass flows of tungsten, from mining to end-use sectors, for the year 2010 and identified key areas where intervention would be beneficial to broaden the supply base and increase the material efficiency of the system. The evidence gathered in this analysis suggests that, although tungsten is susceptible to real risk factors and bottlenecks, there are also options for change. Future R&D work to improve tungsten’s material efficiency should focus on two main priority areas. The first should investigate ways of avoiding tungsten losses as fine particles during beneficiation (both by the optimisation of comminution and recovery from tailings) and improving the economics of the process. Considering that tungsten recovery rates normally range between 60 and 90%, as reported by As a complement to these lines of research, it is necessary to complete a detailed analysis of finished products that contain tungsten, which is missing from this study. An analysis of such type could be extended to cover historical tungsten consumption to provide a model output of end-of-life scrap that could give a valuable estimation on the current and future size of the tungsten stock available for recycling from end-of-life products. In addition, an economic analysis (cost-benefit analysis) which identifies the factors that promote and/or hinder tungsten beneficiation optimisation and recovery is missing from this study. This should explore the cost of current practices and the cost of new technologies against market trends at global level. The economic analysis should investigate geographical differences (i.e., China vs Europe) or sector scale variance (small vs big deposits) and identify if any of the above could result in process optimisation and recovery from mine waste. Future policy efforts to ensure a secure supply of tungsten should consider promoting two main strategies. The first should investigate and evaluate the potential benefits of providing economic incentives for investors and companies willing to explore and develop new tungsten resources and/or re-evaluate known resources outside China to reduce or eliminate dependence on Chinese exports and reduce Chinese influence over prices. This could not only include mining activities but also fabrication and manufacturing of intermediate tungsten products outside of China, where current skills and infrastructure are mainly located. The second approach should investigate the applicability of alternative material efficiency strategies at product level, including the use of less material by design and lifetime extensions for specific key products (e.g., tungsten carbide tools). As with recycling, this line of research would require a detailed analysis of finished products that contain tungsten and available manufacturing technologies to identify available efficiency opportunities. Finally, various knowledge gaps have been identified through the development of the global mass flow analysis for tungsten, including the amount of material contained in both closed and open recycling loops, the resource intensity of different processing routes (including up to date energy consumption figures), material losses along the entire supply chain, data on the fabrication of intermediate products and mine production data discrepancies. Initiatives to fill in these data gaps in future work could include two strategies. The first is to improve stakeholder engagement by academics. Direct and extensive communication with stakeholders, as attempted in this paper through the organisation of a stakeholder workshop and a visit to a tungsten mine, is recommended as a suitable approach to obtain non-commercially sensitive data that would otherwise remain unknown. The second strategy is to increase sustainability reporting by industry. Although it might be difficult to convince companies to report their sustainability indicators without direct regulation by governments, voluntary reporting initiatives such as that promoted by the Global Reporting Initiative ( The priority areas, strategies and initiatives outlined above, especially if combined together, would result in much greater material efficiency and supply chain transparency for tungsten and may eventually lead to a reduction in the supply security concerns identified at the start of this paper. A detailed analysis of mineral supply security literature together with a breakdown of the methods, data and assumptions used to create the mass flow analysis presented in Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: