Two types, A and B, of Zr–2.5Nb samples were subjected to compression tests. Both samples consisted of similar microstructure – hexagonal closed packed (hcp) α phase (the primary phase) and grain boundary bcc (body centered cubic) β phase. However, the hardness of the β phase differed between the samples – respectively being hard (sample A) and soft (sample B) relative to the primary phase. This difference was caused by the presence of fine ω precipitates. The relative hardness of β phase determined almost all aspects of deformed microstructure developments. In sample A, the primary phase had higher lattice strain and in-grain misorientation developments. In sample B, on the other hand, the softer β phase was clearly linked to more deformation twinning and associated grain size refinement and ‘texturing’ of the hcp α phase.Plastic deformation in multi-phase systems is a subject of both scientific and applied interests Two phase Zr–2.5Nb can be an ideal system for ‘tailored’ studies on phase transformation and plastic deformation In the present study, cold rolled Zr–2.5Nb was given suitable heat-treatments Cast Zr–2.5Nb alloy, with chemical composition of Nb: 2.51 Both the specimens were subjected to ‘controlled’ uniaxial cold compression in a servo-hydraulic mechanical testing system (MTS) machine. Reductions of 4.5%, 13% and 37% for sample A, and of 5.5%, 11% and 31% for sample B, were given. The slight differences in reductions, between the samples, were not by design. It was caused by machine limitations in reproducing identical reductions in both samples. As shown in Bulk texture and lattice strain measurements were performed using X-ray diffraction. A Panalytical MRD system was used. It needs to be noted that during progressive deformations, β phases/grains could not be effectively resolved in Xrd. This was valid for higher strains, possibly because of a combination of grain size refinement and defect accumulation. The Xrd measurements were hence restricted to the α phase. For bulk crystallographic texture, five pole figures ((0 Lattice strains were estimated from X-ray peak broadening i.e. FWHM (full width half maximum) values – from the slopes of Sin  Nanoindentation was carried out using a Hysitron Triboindenter (TI 900). A Berkovich diamond indenter was used for the indentation. About 10 grains of both α and β phases were indented in each sample. The nano-hardness The EBSD measurements were taken on FEI Quanta-3D-FEG scanning electron microscope using a TSL-OIM (Tex. SEM Ltd. – Orientation Imaging Microscopy) EBSD package. In each sample, an approximate area of 1 In EBSD analyses, grains were identified based on 15° misorientation criterion - i.e. continuous presence of more than 15° boundary (including the twin boundaries) demarcated the grains for further data processing. Twin boundaries were identified through appropriate axis angle relationship, 94.8°. A JEOL 3010 TEM (300  Though the shape of α was nearly identical between the samples, α grains were larger (approximately 1.5 times) in sample B, see β grains were slightly smaller, but more elongated, in sample B, see β in sample B was softer than α, while the reverse was true for sample A, see The deformed microstructures, as shown in Plastic deformation can refine the grain size through creation of new grain boundaries – new lattice curvatures created through geometrically necessary dislocations Deformation texture developments in α and β phases are captured through inverse pole figures in Relative deformation was generalized in terms of lattice strain estimates ( The nanoindentation measurements, though extremely effective in putting a clear demarcation between the initial microstructures, had ‘limitations’ in precise identification of deformed β, especially in case of highly fragmented deformed β in sample B. In spite of such limitations and a large scatter in experimental nano-hardness values (unavoidable – as the degree of plastic deformation is expected to differ between different grains and also between different parts of the same grain), two clear inferences can be drawn. β in sample A remained harder (at least up to ≈5% cold work) – see The present study brings out clear differences in deformed microstructure developments between samples A and B. Such differences can be attributed to the differences between the starting microstructures, of the respective samples, and resultant differences in strain partitioning and deformation modes. The starting microstructures differed in the grain size of the primary phase (α of sample B was approximately 1.5 times larger) and relative hardness of the second phase (β of sample A was more than two times harder). These, especially the last factor, resulted in significant differences in deformed microstructure developments – rationalized/discussed in the present section. It is expected that the softer phase would accommodate a larger share of the total strain Deformation twinning, observed only in the α phase, was more in sample B. This can be explained in terms of larger grain size and/or presence of softer second phase. Larger grain size is expected The present study involved uniaxial cold compression of two samples –sample A and sample B. Both had a microstructure of hcp α grains with grain boundary and tri-junction bcc β. The two structures, however, had distinct differences: ( Softer β in sample B had more fragmentation and stronger developments in GAM (grain average misorientation). Similarly, softer α in sample A had more lattice strain and GAM. Such trends can be justified from the expected patterns of strain partitioning – more strain partitioning being expected in the softer phase. Only More extensive twinning in sample B can be justified due to larger grain size and/or softer second phase. Though larger grains, in general, are expected to promote deformation twinning, recent studies in single phase Zircaloy 2 had shown that The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from BRNS (Board of Research on Nuclear Science) and the texture/microtexture measurements at the National Facility of Texture and OIM (a DST-IRPHA facility) at IIT Bombay.