The results of a simple and alternative, yet powerful, procedure to experimentally investigate particle breakage behavior are presented in this paper. One-dimensional compression tests on a crushable granular and gap-graded material (aggregates of sugar cubes) are described and discussed. Sugar parallelepipedic (27.4×17.6×12.2mm) cubes are compacted aggregations of welded sugar crystals having a mean size of 0.45mm. Two different geometric arrangements, having widely different initial void ratios (0.2 and 0.8) were tested. The lower void ratio corresponded to ordered piling arrangements, while the higher ratio corresponded to disordered piling arrangements. Vertical stresses up to a maximum of 640kPa were applied and grain size distributions (gsd) were obtained after the loading process. Identical gsd shapes of two S-shaped curves were obtained at the maximum vertical stresses for both ordered and disordered arrangements, underlying the gsd attractor concept associated with highly stressed aggregates irrespective of the initial state. Two breakage mechanisms were identified in the loading process, namely, comminution and splitting crushing. The time-dependent behavior was also studied based on creep tests lasting a maximum of 157.5 days. It was found that creeping could be explained by a delayed grain breakage process.Hardin breakage index Marsal breakage index void ratio initial void ratio grain size distribution amount of divisions due to comminution crushing number of division events by splitting (equal volume breakage) for sieve size number of equivalent particles retained at a given sieve size cumulative number of particles greater than size percentage of particle divisions for the percentage of particle divisions for the percentage of particle divisions for the percentage of particle divisions for the elapsed time vertical normal stress maximum vertical normal stress applied yield stress dimensionless coefficient used in the calculation of the number of division events by splitting for sieve size In coarse crushable soils and rockfill, the breakage of particles during loading constitutes a key feature that controls their mechanical behavior ( Particle breakage depends on certain material properties and features which have been identified in previous research works ( When explaining breakage by fracture mechanics concepts, mineralogy and bonding among crystals are “represented” by “toughness”. For a given geometry and loading scheme, once the toughness has been found, the underlying mineralogy, bonding and microstructure, in a general sense, are no longer invoked to explain the fractures. Of course, this is only part of the modeling concept, but it seems to capture well the deformation of brittle rock aggregates. From this perspective, sugar grains have a given toughness and this is the mechanical information required. They are not conceptually different, if one accepts fracture mechanics, from other brittle materials (rocks, which may also be extremely different in mineralogy and internal structure). Therefore, the relevant crushing mechanisms of rock particles could be present in crushable and brittle particles (sugar cubes) which experience splitting and comminution damage, just as rock particles do, when they are under stress concentrations. The main purpose of this paper is to identify the deformation mechanisms and not to establish a direct relationship with geologic materials in quantitative terms. Another objective of the paper is to get relevant results by means of a simple and cheap procedure which, because of the regular geometry of the cubes, would allow for the testing of widely different initial porosities and geometric arrangements, a possibility which escapes typical gravel shapes. In fact, the initial sample void ratio which can be achieved when using parallelepipedic shapes could be as different as Sugar cubes are aggregates of saccharose crystals. They are manufactured by compacting slightly moistened saccharose crystals (with sizes close to 0.45 The regular initial geometry of cubes is an advantage when trying to identify the breakage mechanisms during loading or over the course of time. An additional objective of the experiments is to investigate the yielding conditions in a macroscopic sense and their relationship to breakage mechanisms. In addition, special attention is given to checking the existence of a limiting attractor for the grain size distribution when the initial particle arrangement is widely different. Major changes in the initial granular soil fabric are difficult to achieve with subrounded, angular or “natural” granular geometries, but are easily achieved with a regular cubic geometry of particles, as shown below. This paper is based on Sugar cubes ( Unconfined compression strength tests ( These figures are found in soft clayey rocks. The friction angle between sugar cubes was measured on regular cube arrangements by means of a tilting table following test details described in Two different arrangements have been tested: Ordered piles of sugar cubes in face-to-face structures, resulting in low void ratios of approximately Disordered aggregates of cubes in random arrangements, having high void ratios of approximately Tests were performed in a Rowe oedometer cell with an inner diameter of 152 In the ordered arrangements, sugar cubes were placed in layers following a certain orientation of the larger side of the cubes. This orientation was changed in each layer by rotating the orientation of the major cube axis by 90 The relationship between the oedometer cell dimensions and the sugar cubes follows the criteria used for oedometer tests on rockfill and coarse aggregates, as can be seen in The set of tests performed are defined in At the end of each test, the grain size distribution was determined by means of a sieving technique. This sieving process was performed very carefully by minimizing the energy used and performing the gsd test in steps, namely, one for each sieve. Larger broken particles were separated by hand in each sieve. The separation of some sugar crystal grains from the sugar aggregates, due to weak bonds, can occur in this process, and therefore, increase the “finer” particle size. A yield stress of about 250 The evolution of the grain size distribution curves with applied maximum stress is given in One may wonder if the gsd of the tested cube arrangements has reached an ultimate state at the maximum applied stress of the experiments. This issue was further examined by calculating the number of particles during the loading process. This is done by assuming an equivalent spherical diameter for particles retained between two successive sieves. The resulting cumulative distribution of the number of particles, It should also be noted that the behavior of the sugar cubes is similar to that of gap-graded materials ( Further support for the closeness to a unique attractor gsd is given by the evolution of breakage indices, to be calculated later ( A second remarkable result of the set of gsd curves in It should also be noted that there is significant grain breakage for stresses above the yield values when examining the evolution of grain size distributions in The breakage process was analyzed in more detail by examining the shape of the particles in the breakage process (see Considering the sieving process, let us address the size and shape of particles retained in the sieve #0.5″ (12.7 The next sieve (3/8″=9 It will be assumed that the splitting mechanism produces particles which are retained by the sieves 0.5″, 3/8″, #4 (4.75 Summarizing and generalizing the preceding discussion, the number of equivalent particles retained at a given sieve size The number of division events by splitting (equal volume breakage) for sieve size It was further accepted that all particles retained in the #16 sieve (1.18 Therefore, the following expression is used to calculate the amount of divisions due to comminution crushing, The preceding calculations were performed at the end of each test, and therefore, the statistics on particle breakage can be related to the applied stress. The relevance of each one of the defined mechanisms is better appreciated if the number of particle divisions is normalized with respect to the total number of divisions. These normalized values, Let us consider the disordered samples ( If the “steady state” gsd for high stresses ( The calculations of Even if the hypothesis made to distinguish the breakage mechanism looks somewhat crude, what is important is to investigate the relative changes with the initial sample structure and with the applied stress. The derived parameters proved to be very indicative of the evolution of breakage mechanisms with stress and, in particular, the role of the yield stress as the initial point to trigger a rapid development of splitting mechanisms. Interestingly, the differences in this regard between the two widely different particle arrangements are minor. A further indication of the nature of the breakage mechanisms is given by the evolution of Breakage Indices with the imposed stress. This information is given in Both provide the same results, namely, the breakage indices remain small for stresses below the yield stress and increase fast in the vicinity of the yield stress. It should also be noted that the two indices tend towards an asymptotic value for the highest applied stresses, which is consistent with the previously reported steady state common grain size distribution for the two types of particle arrangements. It may be thought that the size of sugar crystals (retained in sieve #40 – 0.4 Time effects were investigated in oedometer tests in which the applied stress (240 The time-dependent response was only measured for the disordered arrangements. Disordered samples, having an average void ratio of The decrease in void ratio with time, in natural and logarithmic scales, is represented in Grain size distributions could be determined at the end of each testing period. The evolution of grain size distributions at the end of the tests ( During the breaking process over time, the two dominant grain size families (11 Let us again consider the retained particles by sieve ½″, shown in Eqs. Normalized values, In a similar manner, the number of divisions may be normalized with respect to the situation at the maximum creeping time (157.5 days; The calculated ratios, The values for Hardin, Breakage indices Particle breakage mechanisms in loaded coarse aggregates have been analyzed from the testing of regular blocks of a brittle material of relatively low strength in a simple, yet very informative, procedure. Two very different initial porosities (very low and high) of specimens were obtained by two different piling methods (ordered and disordered arrangements) of regular parallelepiped cubes. After the loading process at a relatively high confining stress, in a remarkable result far from intuitive, the gsd curves of these two widely different arrangements converged into a unique grain distribution. Therefore, it has been confirmed that the grain size distribution, irrespective of the initial fabric, evolves into an “attractor” curve during loading. The gsd curves evolved around two families of grain sizes which are related to the initial two sizes, in an apparently independent manner. The final gsd was defined as a superposition of two limiting “attractors”. However, it remains to be shown that the same conclusion holds if the initial sizes of the gap-graded granular mixture are close enough. In the loading processes, the evolution of the grain sizes was explained by the action of the following breakage mechanisms which were identified: local crushing (comminution) which generates particles significantly smaller than the original particle, and particle splitting which divides the broken particle into roughly two halves. The development of breakage was investigated in more detail using a procedure based on interpreting the mass fractions retained at each particular sieve. It was found that: Particle breakage is very limited for stresses below the yield stress. The intensity of the two breakage mechanisms increase fast in the vicinity of the yielding stress. Conventional breakage indices were also seen to increase rapidly at stresses close to the yield stress. In fact, the yield stress was better identified in the tests performed by gsd-related criteria than on the basis of the classical interpretation of compressive behavior in Long-term tests at a constant confining stress supported a creep law relating deformations to the logarithm of time. The evolution of breakage was analyzed by examining samples at different creeping times. It was found that the evolution of grain size distributions followed a pattern entirely similar to the pattern observed during a fast increase in stress. In particular, creeping was also explained by the emergence of a dominant grain size associated with the crystal size and the reduction in size associated with the initial size of cubical particles. No evidence of an asymptotic exhaustion of long-term deformations was found despite the maximum duration of the tests (157.5 days). It appears that the gsd attractor is, in fact, a function of time. Breakage rates evolved from maximum values at early times towards a progressive reduction in breakage rates as time increased. The fact that increasing stress and increasing time at constant stress result in common patterns of gsd suggests that a unified phenomenon explains both phenomena. The subcritical crack propagation within particles was proposed by The results of this experimental research are useful for a better understanding of the breakage mechanisms taking place in coarse crushable aggregates (gravels and rockfill) subjected to one-dimensional compression conditions. It is believed that some of the findings presented herein could be applied to generalized stress-strain paths. The two crushing mechanisms described in this study are associated with the distribution of stresses in particles due to the action of concentrated loads which act around the particles ( The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided to the first author by the Programme Alßan “high level scholarships to Latin America” of the