This study investigates the possibility of multi-objective optimization in the transesterification of mahogany seed oil (MSO). The Taguchi method together with Grey relational analysis (GRA) was used to maximize both percent fatty acid methyl ester (FAME) yield and heat transfer coefficient (HTC). It was found that methanol to oil molar ratio was the factor that contributed the most in obtaining high percent FAME (ester) yield and HTC. Employing the following conditions: 32.6 wt% methanol (9:1 methanol to oil molar ratio), 0.5 wt% catalyst, 60 °C temperature and 300 rpm agitation was found to offer an improved percent ester yield and HTC. A confirmatory test resulted in an ester yield of 90.1 % and HTC up to 153.0 W/m2K. The structure of the optimized transesterified mahogany seed oil (TM) was confirmed by FTIR analysis. In the event of comparison, TM, raw mahogany seed oil (FM) and SAE40 were analyzed by cooling curve analyses. TM identified to have superior quenching performance.Vegetable and animal oils as a class of fluids have been used for hundreds of years, if not longer, as quenchants for hardening steel. However, when petroleum oils came into being in the early 1900s, the use of these fluids as quenchants became unpopular ( Chemically, vegetable oils and animal fats are high molecular esters of fatty acids. These are known as triglycerides of fatty acids (TG). These TG in general, have the molecular weight in the order of 800 g/mol or more ( The transesterification process as highlighted involves many parameters that affect the reaction and optimizing these parameters requires a large number of experiments, which is laborious, time-consuming and economically non-viable. The Taguchi method has been widely applied in manufacturing to robustly design a product or process with a single quality characteristic ( The change of heat flux density during quenching operations is associated with the temperature difference between the hot surface of the component and the liquid ( The present study focuses on the optimization of the process parameters for maximum percent ester yield and HTC in transesterification of FM using Taguchi based GRA approach. After the esterification reaction where the percent free fatty acid (%FFA) was reduced to a value of less than 0.5%, transesterification was carried out. Multi-response optimization analysis of FAME yield and HTC with Taguchi-based GRA was conducted. The optimization analyses were carried out according to the criteria the-larger-the-better. The Taguchi method with an L9 orthogonal array was implemented ( For 100g of oil sample, 3:1, 6:1 and 9:1 methanol to oil molar ratios were equivalent to 10.9, 21.7 and 32.6wt% of methanol respectively. The optimal experimental conditions were obtained from the design of experiment (DOE) using MINITAB 16 statistical software. The transesterification process during optimization was carried out as follows: The calculated mass of the NaOH was dissolved into the measured methanol and the mixture was then poured into 100g of the oil sample. Next, the mixture was placed on a magnetic stirrer at 60 °C for stirring and heated for 1 h. Finally, the solution was poured into a separating funnel for gravitational settling for the separation of FAME and glycerol. The denser glycerol was drained. Afterwards, the ester was purified by water washing and then drained. Results of the transesterification reaction were evaluated in terms of percent FAME yield (ester yield) and heat transfer coefficient (HTC). The percent ester yield was calculated using HTC was determined using the following method: A heating coil was fixed at one of the interior sides of a well-lagged square based rectangular calorimeter. Three thermometers were fixed directly opposite to the coil at three different locations at the other interior side. The coil was connected in series with a D.C. supply, an ammeter, a rheostat, and a plug key or switch. A voltmeter was connected directly across the coil terminals ( The FTIR spectra were recorded on CARY 630 FTIR model of Agilent technologies in a scanning range of 650–4000 cm- In the generation, the first step is the normalization of the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio values in the range between 0 and 1. The grey relational coefficient (GRC) is then calculated from the normalized S/N ratio to indicate the relationship between the desired and the actual S/N ratio. In the subsequent step, the grey relational grade (GRG) is calculated by taking the mean of the grey relational coefficient corresponding to each response. The grey relational grade is used for the overall evaluation of the process. The present investigation targeted on the optimization of percent ester yield and HTC. So on this account, the normalization of the S/N ratios was carried out according to the criterion of the performance characteristics the-larger-the-better. The normalized S/N ratio X In the subsequent step, deviation sequence (Δ) and the GRC were calculated from the normalized values according to Eqs. The multi-objective characteristics could be analyzed using the grade values listed in The influence of each transesterification process parameter on the grey relational grade at different levels can be identified since the experimental design employed was orthogonal. Therefore, the mean for each process parameter of each level has been found through the Taguchi method. Using MINITAB 16 statistical software, the experimental data for GRG were converted into S/N ratio according to the larger-the-better criterion. The mean of the GRG for each level of the transesterification process parameters is summarized and presented in  The confirmation test was performed in order to validate the experimental results. The predicted grey relational grade The comparisons of the predicted and the experimental grey relational grade are shown in The transesterified mahogany seed oil (TM) produced using the optimum parameters setting was subjected to FTIR and cooling curve analyses. In addition, heat transfer coefficient and heat flux density at high temperatures were estimated from the cooling curves. The same analyses were run on the raw mahogany seed oil (FM) for comparison. The results are presented in the following sections. The spectra from the FT-IR analysis for the raw and transesterified bioquenchants displayed several absorption peaks as illustrated in Figs.  The dependence of HTC on the surface temperature during quenching operation is presented in  In the present investigation, optimization in percent ester yield and HTC in the transesterification of the MSO was successfully carried out by using the Taguchi-Grey relational analysis approach. The experimental factors considered are methanol to oil molar ratio, catalyst concentration, temperature and agitation (stirring speed). The analysis indicated that input parameters such as methanol to oil molar ratio and agitation showed a powerful effect on the percent ester yield and HTC. The conclusions of the study are given as follows: The optimum values of input variables influencing the transesterification process are 9:1 methanol-to-oil molar ratio (32.6 wt% of methanol), 0.5 wt % catalysts loading, 60 °C temperature and 300 rpm agitation. The methanol-to-oil molar ratio is the most substantial process parameter affecting the percent ester yield and HTC whereas catalyst concentration is the least significant parameter. The results of the confirmation experiments with GRG of 0.9687, assured the accuracy and reliability of the GRG model Equation developed for predicting optimum percent ester yield and HTC. FT-IR analysis confirmed the formation of methyl esters in the TM produced using the optimum parameters setting. From the cooling curve analysis; the TM obtained using the optimum experimental variables displays splendid HTC. Hence, amongst the tested quenchants, TM has shown superior quenching performance. R. M. Dodo: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Wrote the paper. T. Ause, E. T. Dauda: Analyzed and interpreted the data. U. Shehu, A. P. I. Popoola: Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data. This work was supported by the Management of Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria through the Tertiary Education Trust Fund ( The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.