The recovery of zinc from sphalerite concentrate by oxidative leaching with ammonium, sodium and potassium persulphates in sulphuric acid media is reported in this investigation. Effects of particle size, reaction temperature, acid concentration, pulp density (PD) and oxidant concentration on zinc dissolution rate were determined. The results showed that leaching of 95% zinc was achieved from the concentrate of particle size −150 μm at a temperature of 333 K for 5 h in the presence of 20% (w/v) ammonium persulphate (APS) with 5% (v/v) sulphuric acid concentration. The best fit of the kinetic data to a diffusion-controlled model indicated that diffusion through the product layer was the rate-controlling step during the dissolution. The activation energy was determined to be 41±2 kJ/mol in the temperature range 308–333 K which was also an indication of the diffusion-controlled process. The mechanism of the leaching was further established by characterising the original concentrate and the leach residue by XRD phase identification, optical and SEM-EDS studies.Amongst the non-ferrous metals zinc is one of the most commonly used metal after aluminium and copper as its production and consumption world-wide stood at nearly 7.7 Mt in the year 1998–1999 The selection of an oxidising agent suitable for hydrometallurgical recovery of zinc from sphalerite concentrate has been given considerable attention Zinc concentrate for the leaching study was obtained from Hindustan Zinc, Udaipur. The concentrate was ground and sieved to −150 μm. The material was sieved to obtain the particle size distribution. Sulphuric acid and ammonium persulphate of laboratory reagent grade were used in this study. Analytical grade chemicals were used for analysis. Leaching experiments were carried out in a closed glass vessel housed in a water bath, which was placed on a thermostatically controlled magnetic stirrer. The desired amount of zinc concentrate was added to the 0.2 L leaching solution containing a known amount of ammonium persulphate maintained at the required temperature. The temperature was monitored and controlled by passing water through the bath. At selected time intervals, a known amount of slurry sample was withdrawn and filtered with Whatman 41 filter paper; zinc and persulphate in the filtrate were analysed titrimetrically using standard methods X-ray diffraction as well as petrological studies indicated the presence of sphalerite as the major zinc-containing phase along with pyrite, FeS, hematite, alumina and silica in minor quantities. The particle size distribution and chemical analysis of the concentrate is shown in The effects of particle size, acid concentration, pulp density (PD), oxidant concentration and temperature on the recovery of zinc from the zinc concentrate were studied. A comparative study on the zinc recovery with sodium and potassium persulphates was also carried out. The effect of particle size on the leaching of metal from the zinc concentrate was studied. In these experiments, the initial sulphuric acid concentration 5% (v/v), leaching temperature (333 K), pulp density (10%) and the amount of ammonium persulphate 20% (w/v) were maintained constant as shown in The recovery of zinc from the sulphide concentrate was also examined against time using the mixed particles (−150 μm size) of the concentrate while varying acid concentration in the range 0–5% (v/v) at a constant temperature of 333 K and a pulp density of 10% solids. The results plotted in Experiments on varying pulp density of zinc concentrate indicated the increase in zinc recovery with the rise in pulp density of the slurry up to 10%, and beyond this a fall in zinc extraction was observed. Therefore, a 10% pulp density was maintained in the subsequent leaching experiments. A plot of the zinc extraction against time is presented in Data on variation of temperature (308–333 K) on the recovery of zinc at different time intervals are plotted in Leaching experiments were also carried out with sodium (SPS) and potassium persulphates (PPS) to compare with ammonium persulphate Dissolution of zinc from the zinc concentrate in the presence of persulphate salts in acidic solution may be represented by the following reaction: The reaction of the zinc concentrate may proceed in a topochemical manner, whereby the thickness of an outer shell of insoluble product is progressively increased, while the inner core of the unreacted metal sulphide particle is decreased. The rate of dissolution was tested against the model based on diffusion through the product layer The kinetics of leaching have also been studied at varying particle size (−150 to −45 μm) of zinc sulphide concentrate. Here also the kinetic data fitted well The Arrhenius plot The XRD analysis of the zinc concentrate has shown the presence of sphalerite (ZnS) as the major phase along with other minor phases. The XRD pattern indicating major peaks of three leach residues collected at different time intervals viz. 0.5, 1 and 5 h at 333 K in the presence of APS as an oxidant is shown in The reflected light microscopic examination of zinc sulphide concentrate as well as final leach residues was also carried out to understand the mode of leaching The surface morphology of zinc sulphide concentrate as well as leach residue collected at different leaching time intervals was examined by SEM-EDS Results discussed above showed that ammonium persulphate was an effective oxidant for the leaching of zinc from sphalerite concentrate. Extraction of about 95% zinc was achieved under the conditions: particle size of the concentrate −150 μm, temperature of leaching: 333 K, leaching time: 5 h, sulphuric acid concentration: 5 vol.%, and amount of APS: 20% (w/v), solid–liquid (weight/volume) ratio: 1:10. Increase in temperature from 308 to 333 K led to the rise in availability of oxygen level and diffusivity of the lixiviant which resulted in higher zinc dissolution. However, leaching of the metal at a temperature of 343 K and beyond showed decrease in the extraction yield because of enhanced decomposition of ammonium persulphate. Similarly, decrease in zinc recovery at higher oxidant concentration was due to the formation of a double salt of zinc [ZnSO The kinetic study indicated that the leaching of zinc followed a diffusion-controlled model and the rate was governed by diffusion of lixiviant through a porous sulphur layer as the reaction product. An activation energy of 41±2 kJ/mol was found. The leach residue was characterised with the help of XRD, SEM-EDS and reflected light microscopy which corroborated the diffusion-controlled leaching mechanism. rate constant (h fraction reacted time in h stoichiometric coefficient (dimensionless) molecular weight of major zinc mineral diffusion coefficient of zinc ions in porous medium (m concentration of lixiviant (mol/m density of zinc ore (kg/m radius of unreacted particles (m) Authors are thankful to Prof. P. Ramachandra Rao, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, for giving the permission to publish the paper. Authors are also thankful to Mr. Ravi Kumar and Mr. S.K. Das for the help in XRD and SEM-EDS studies.