The mineral processing and metal production sector is endeavouring to identify opportunities to improve the sustainability of its operations and reduce its greenhouse gas footprint, with improved energy efficiency receiving increased attention. However, if truly sustainable outcomes are to be obtained it is essential that a life cycle approach be adopted in evaluating these opportunities. In this paper, life cycle assessment methodology is used to indicate where in the metal production life cycle this focus on energy efficiency should be and to evaluate a number of potential opportunities for reducing the greenhouse gas footprint of primary metal production.
                  Results from life cycle assessments of the main primary metal production processes, together with current and predicted global metal production rates, ore grades and grind or liberation size, have been used in a broad analysis to indicate that endeavours to improve the energy efficiency of primary metal production should focus mainly on the metal extraction stage, particularly for steel and aluminium. Declining ore grades and more complex ore bodies anticipated in the future can be expected to significantly increase the energy required for comminution of the main metal ores and will present opportunities for improving the energy efficiency of primary metal production. However, these opportunities will still be appreciably less than potential energy efficiency improvements in the extraction stage for these metals.Increasing demand for metals, declining ore grades and complex new deposits are all contributing to an increase in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from primary metal production. As a result, the mineral processing and metal production sector is coming under increasing pressure to reduce its energy consumption and GHG emissions and improve the overall sustainability of its operations. In response to these pressures, the industry is endeavouring to identify opportunities to develop solutions and technologies to achieve these sustainability goals ( The concept of a life cycle approach in assessing the sustainability of products and services has been developed over the last few decades as a strategy that aims at taking into account all of the sustainability impacts (environmental, economic and social) that a product or service will have throughout its life cycle from ‘cradle-to-grave’. At each stage in the life cycle there is resource and energy consumption and impacts created. Life cycle assessment (LCA) is an internationally standardised methodology (ISO 14040 series) that was initially developed to account for these environmental impacts throughout a product’s life cycle from raw material acquisition to the production, use and disposal of the material or product. It involves the compilation of an inventory of relevant environmental exchanges of the material or product throughout its entire life cycle and evaluating the potential environmental impacts associated with those exchanges. More recently, the inclusion of economic and social impacts into LCA methodology has been proposed ( Life cycle assessments of various primary metal production processes have previously been carried out by the authors for typical Australian ore grades with the results reported mainly in terms of greenhouse gas emissions and embodied energy ( There has been a long-term trend for ore grades to fall over time as shown by It is commonly accepted ( In addition to likely falls in ore grades in the future, many of the newer orebodies are complex and finer-grained, requiring additional grinding in order to achieve mineral liberation. Both of these effects, either combined or in isolation, will increase the amount of energy required for primary metal production, as well as increasing the associated greenhouse gas emissions as the energy inputs are primarily fossil fuel based. The majority of this increase will be in the mining and mineral processing stage, especially for base metal ores, due to the additional amount of waste material that has to be handled and processed in this stage. The downstream metal extraction and refining stage is largely unaffected by ore grade, as a relatively constant concentrate grade is produced irrespective of initial ore grade. The effect of base metal ore grades falling over the next two decades to the values given in The likely increase in electrical energy consumption for comminution of base metal ores due to finer grind/liberation sizes was estimated in broad terms by assuming that typical grind sizes (ie. P Although this traditional Bond approach in estimating comminution energy requirements may have limitations when applied to some comminution devices ( It is of interest to compare the theoretical and actual energy consumptions for metal extraction, as this comparison gives an indication of the likely scope for reducing energy consumption in practice in this stage of the metal production life cycle. Metals are generally extracted from either oxide or sulphide ores. The oxides and sulphides of the important industrial metals are chemically stable and significant energy is required to break the chemical bonds to produce metal. Gibbs free energy is the ultimate measure of chemical stability, but the heat of formation of its compounds (usually oxides or sulphides) normally dictates the minimum energy requirement for extracting a metal from its ores ( The results presented above indicate that endeavours to reduce the energy consumption and associated GHG emissions of primary metal production should mainly focus on the metal extraction stage of the metal life cycle, and that there is considerable scope to make significant reductions here, particularly for steel and aluminium. While the contribution of the mining and mineral processing stages (in particular comminution) to energy consumption and GHG emissions can be expected to increase in the future as outlined above, and will present opportunities for reducing these impacts by improving the energy efficiency of comminution, these opportunities will still be appreciably less than those from the metal extraction and refining stages. For example, the results above show that the potential reduction in predicted future global energy consumption for a 50% improvement in comminution energy efficiency for the main metallic ores (ie. approximately 4350 There are a number of technologies under development in the metal extraction stage of iron/steel and aluminium which may realise some of the opportunities for reducing the energy and greenhouse footprints of primary metal production identified above. These new and emerging technologies are described below, along with their predicted energy and greenhouse gas savings. While mineral processing offers less opportunities for reducing energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions compared to metal extraction as pointed out above, there are some new technologies which may produce energy savings if incorporated optimally into comminution circuits. Two of these are stirred mills and high pressure grinding rolls, and these are also described below. These technologies in combination with others (e.g. improved circuit design), may possibly achieve the 50% improvement in energy efficiency for comminution referred to above ( Woodchar or biomass char is considered renewable because the carbon cycle via wood (biomass) is very short (5–10 Historically, molten slags from metal smelting processes have been disposed of in air-cooled slag pits, with the solidified slag used for land fill or road base material after crushing and screening. In some modern operations, the molten slag is granulated using high pressure water jets to produce a glassy product that can be used as an extender for Portland cement. However, apart from issues such as water consumption and the production of a wet product that must be dried before use, the existing wet granulation slag process does not recover the high grade energy in the molten slag. Dry granulation of blast furnace slag using a spinning disc or cup has been developed as an alternative treatment process, aimed at overcoming the environmental problems and other disadvantages experienced with the wet granulation process while still producing a high value slag product. The technique was first proposed in the 1980s in the UK and Japan, and has been tested at both pilot and plant-scale but has not yet been commercialised. CSIRO has recently developed and pilot-plant tested a new integrated slag treatment process based on a two-step operation involving a dry granulator and a packed-bed counter-current heat exchanger ( Blast furnaces are used for smelting iron ores to produce pig iron, prior to refining into steel. These furnaces, in general, suffer from a number of disadvantages (e.g. agglomerated or lump feed, coke not coal, coke ovens). A range of “direct smelting” processes using bath smelting technology have been developed in recent years to address these issues. In these processes, smelting takes place in a single reactor where ore and coal are both charged into the same melt or bath (hence the name “bath smelting”). The processes utilise post combustion of the process offgases, the heat released being transferred back to the bath to compensate for the endothermic smelting reactions. One of the most advanced of these processes is the HIsmelt process for direct ironmaking developed by Rio Tinto at Kwinana in Western Australia. The HIsmelt process produces molten iron utilising fine iron ores (and other iron-bearing fines) and non-coking coals. The reduction in energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions of the bath smelting process compared to the conventional integrated route for steel production were estimated to be approximately 2.2 Aluminium smelting is carried out using the Hall–Heroult electrolytic process. Stability of the aluminium-bath interface is one of the major factors affecting current efficiency in the electrolysis cell. The cathodic surface in existing cells is a molten metal aluminium pad. The large electrical forces in the cell cause the pad to move and undulate, giving the pad a flowing uneven surface. The anode must be positioned to avoid contact and electrical shorting with the metal pad. The use of aluminium-wetted and drained cathodes will allow the metal to be drained away and should enable a reduction in the thickness of the metal pad, which will significantly reduce the potential to form waves or splashes in the molten aluminium thereby allowing ultimate stability of this interface to be achieved. A stable aluminium-bath interface will also allow the anode-to-cathode distance (ACD) to be reduced, thereby producing a lower cell voltage. The lower cell voltage and higher current efficiency will reduce the power consumption of the cell. Coating methods tried in laboratory and plant tests to produce this type of cathode surface have included titanium diboride (TiB Since its first commercial application in 1985, high pressure grinding rolls have become a near standard unit operation for pre-grinding cement clinker, and grinding of raw materials such as slag, coal and lime in the cement industry. It has subsequently been utilised in the diamond industry for selective liberation. The broader use of high pressure grinding rolls for metalliferous minerals has only been considered more recently. Initial concerns over wear rate of the rolls have been addressed, and as a result there are strong signs of increasing interest, particularly in the processing of gold, copper and iron ores. While energy reductions in the order of 30–50% have been suggested for the high pressure grinding rolls based on cement industry experience, reductions in the order of 20% are more likely for metalliferous ores ( Three stirred mill types have gained industry acceptance for fine and ultra-fine grinding duties, ie., the tower mill, the detritor mill and the IsaMill. The first two mills are vertical stirred mills with steel spirals and long pins respectively to agitate the mill charge, while the latter mill is a large horizontal stirred mill with discs as stirrers. The major advantage of stirred mills over traditional ball mills are their ability to effectively use smaller grinding media for fine and ultra-fine grinding to achieve high energy efficiency at high mill throughput ( The estimated reduction in annual global GHG emissions (predominantly CO The results from a number of life cycle assessments of primary metal production processes, together with predicted future ore grades, metal production rates and liberation size, have been used to show that endeavours to reduce the energy consumption and associated GHG emissions from primary metal production should mainly focus on the metal extraction stage of the metal life cycle, and that there is considerable scope to make significant reductions here, particularly for steel and aluminium. While the contribution of the mining and mineral processing stage to energy consumption and GHG emissions can be expected to increase in the future as a result of a deterioration in the quality of ores, and will present opportunities for reducing these impacts by improving the energy efficiency of comminution, these opportunities will still be appreciably less than those from the metal extraction and refining stage. For example, the reduction in the predicted future global energy consumption for a 50% improvement in comminution energy efficiency for the main metallic ores is about seven times less than the potential global energy savings for the metal extraction stage for steel production alone. The use of biomass as a source of carbon as a fuel and reductant in primary metal production, particularly in iron and steelmaking, was shown to offer the greatest potential for greenhouse gas reductions from primary metal production. The findings of this study reinforce the need to take a life cycle approach in identifying and evaluating opportunities for improving the sustainability of primary metal production.