A statistical study of the effects of deposition temperature and hydrogen flow on the wear behavior of DLC films was examined using the RSM method based on a central composite design. DLC films were deposited on the nitrocarburized AISI 4140 steel by the pulsed DC PACVD method at temperature range of 60–120°C and in an atmosphere of hydrogen range of 0–40sccm. Results indicated that a combination of relatively high deposition temperature and low hydrogen flow or low deposition temperature and high hydrogen flow produce DLC film with low wear rate and low friction coefficient.Surface protective films are critical for many industrial applications In the DLC film growth process, multiple deposition parameters such as deposition temperature, deposition atmosphere, flow rate, deposition method often play role simultaneously An alternative method for a systematic understanding of the effects of deposition variables on the properties of DLC films is statistical design techniques such as response surface methodology (RSM). RSM consists of a group of mathematical and statistical techniques used in the development of a functional relationship between a response of interest (DLC properties) and a number of process variables The attractive feature of using statistical design techniques such as RSM is that they require few experimental runs to establish the dependence between film properties and deposition parameters. Also, statistical design techniques can provide useful and precise information to show the significance of the observed trends This article describes the experimental/statistical studies on the effect of variation of two deposition parameters (deposition temperature and hydrogen flow) on the wear behavior of the DLC films that were grown on the nitrocarburized AISI 4140 steel. RSM was used to help in finding out the optimal deposition condition (low wear rate and low friction coefficient). In this method, the response is influenced by several variables (deposition temperature and hydrogen flow in this research) and the objective is to optimize this response. RSM not only defines the relation between parameters and responses but can also estimate the effects of individual parameters and the interaction of parameters on each of the response variables In this study, the experimental design and statistical analysis were analyzed by Design-Expert 8.0.7. A central composite design (CCD) with two factors and two levels was chosen to evaluate the combined effect of two independent variables, i.e. deposition temperature and hydrogen flow, on the wear rate and friction coefficient of the DLC films under the given conditions. After preliminary DLC deposition trials, the upper and lower limits for the independent variables (deposition temperature and hydrogen flow) were established. The control levels for the deposition temperature and hydrogen flow are shown in The specimens were in the form of 20 The chamber was pumped down to 10 Surface roughness (Ra) of the treated samples was measured by a hand-held Roughness Tester TR200. DLC films were characterized by micro-Raman spectroscopy. Raman spectra were measured using a Senterra system operated with a 785 Hardness and Young modulus of the DLC samples was calculated using a TriboScope system (Hysitron Inc. USA), equipped with a Cube corner type indenter tip. The calibrated contact area function was derived from indentation tests conducted previously on a fused quartz standard specimen. Five indentations were made on each DLC sample in random locations in order to obtain reliable results. Residual stress of the DLC samples was calculated with Raman spectroscopy by using Eq. Wear test was performed using pin-on-disk method. The pin was 5 The specific wear rates were calculated by using Eq. DLC films have a large amount of compressive residual stress that reduces their adhesion to metal substrates particularly steel substrates. Residual compressive stress in the DLC films is due to difference in the properties of the DLC film and steel substrate (especially thermal coefficient expansion, hardness and Young modulus)  The significance of the different models (linear, two factorial, quadratic and cubic) was determined by using both An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was done in order to investigate the significance of the chosen model. ANOVA results are tabulated in The quadratic model (that was chosen for the wear rate)  According to ANOVA results, the fitted model for wear rate of the DLC samples is shown in Eq.  In order to characterize structure of the DLC films (sp  According to the previous research, the presence of separate D peak in the Raman spectra ( In the DLC films, the intensity and position of the G and D peak are related to the sp The DLC-2 sample indicates D peak with the highest intensity that might be due to increasing the carbon crystalline number in the film. In addition These observations might suggest that the structure of the DLC-2 sample is small crystallites embedded in an amorphous carbon matrix with high sp In addition, Among the DLC samples, the lowest wear rate belongs to DLC-1. A Raman spectrum of the DLC-1 sample indicates the lowest FWGM (G) among the samples. On the other hand the DLC-1 might have crystallite with the highest crystal size. The DLC-1 shows crystallite higher in size and lower in number compared to the DLC-2. The DLC-1 has the highest sp DLC-3 indicates the highest wear rate and friction coefficient among the DLC samples. Compared to DLC-1 and DLC-2 samples, DLC-3 shows the smallest crystallite embedded in the amorphous carbon matrix. Although the DLC-3 shows higher sp Deposition parameters (deposition temperature and hydrogen content) affect the chemical structure of the DLC films as well as their mechanical properties The hardness of the DLC films depends on the sp According to classical theories of wear, hardness affects the wear resistance of a film and higher hardness led to lower wear rate Although the DLC-3 showed higher surface hardness compared to the DLC-2 but wear rate of the DLC-2 is lower than DLC-3. These results show that wear behavior of the DLC samples did not follow the classical theory of wear. Previous researches showed that the elastic modulus can also have an important influence on the wear behavior of the materials. In particular, the ratio of hardness ( Neuville showed that the surface microrugosity and the surface chemistry of the coating affect the wear behavior. Both of them are influencing the friction coefficient of the coating. He suggested that the modified criterion The modified criterion (  Wear behavior of the plasma nitrocarburized sample was explained in detail in our previous work The main wear mechanisms for the DLC-1 and DLC-2 samples could be described as a burnishing type of wear. SEM image of the worn surfaces of the DLC-1 and DLC-2 samples with higher magnitude show that the surface asperities were removed during the wear process that can be evidence of the burnishing type of wear ( Besides burnishing type of wear, graphitization can be another wear mechanism in the DLC films. In the case of carbon films, the temperature of surface asperities on the carbon film can increase high enough to cause the graphitization process of the carbon atoms  According to ANOVA results, the fitted model for the friction coefficient of the DLC samples is described in Eq. Design-Expert software is used for optimization of the results obtained from the wear rate and friction coefficient. The effect of hydrogen flow and deposition temperature on the wear behavior of the DLC films was investigated and the most important results can summarized as follows: ANOVA results indicated that all the experimental variables significantly affected the wear rate and friction coefficient of the DLC films. DLC samples that were deposited at high temperature in the atmosphere with low hydrogen flow show the wear rate and friction coefficient as low as the samples that were deposited at low temperature in the atmosphere with high hydrogen flow. No delamination or spalling was observed on the worn surface of the DLC films. Burnishing wear was the main wear mechanism that was observed on the worn surface of the DLC-1 and DLC-2 samples. Graphitization was observed on the wear track of the DLC-1 and DLC-3 samples. 