Bisphosphonates is a class of chemical compounds finding extensive medical applications against bone disorders including osteoporosis, Pagets’ disease, etc. Non-N-containing members include etidronate, clodronate and tiludronate, while N-containing bisphosphonates include active pharmaceutical compounds such as pamidronate, neridronate, olpadronate, alendronate, ibandronate, risedronate and zoledronate. The present study covers 20 years of analytical research on this group of compounds, focusing on bioanalytical and pharmaceutical QC applications. A wide range of analytical techniques is presented and critically discussed including among others liquid and gas phase separations, electrophoretic, electroanalytical, automated and enzymatic approaches.Bisphosphonates is a class of pharmacological active chemical compounds that inhibit osteoclast action and the resorption of bone. Initially synthesized in the 19th century, these compounds were originally used as water softeners From a chemical point of view, the pharmacological function of these active compounds is determined by the P-C-P configuration, where two phosphate groups are covalently linked to a carbon atom as shown in The exact mechanism of bisphosphonates action was proved only recently Pyrophosphate is a natural inhibitor of the mineralization process in the bones which are protected by alkaline phosphatase. People with genetic problems of this enzyme have soft bones due to the action of pyrophosphates as they can get into the bone. By substituting an oxygen atom by a carbon, then a bisphosphonate is formed. Bisphosphonates not only get inside the bone, but they attach strongly to the bone mineral. The most common side-effect of orally administered N-containing preparations is stomach upset and inflammation of the esophagus. The patients should therefore be seated in an upright position for at least 30–60 Separation analytical methods dedicated to the analysis of bisphosphonates have previously been reviewed by Sparidans and den Hartigh, covering the time frame up to 1997 Liquid chromatography (LC) is a well established group of analytical techniques with extensive applications in bioanalysis and pharmaceuticals quality control Reversed-phase high pressure liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) is based on the use of solid particulate (usually suitably functionalized/chemically modified silica or polymeric materials) or monolithic support as stationary phases. Mixtures of organic solvents with buffers containing acidic or basic additives employed as mobile phases have been widely applied to separate moderately hydrophilic and hydrophobic compounds. On this basis, a RP-HPLC assay with fluorimetric detection has been proposed by Kline et al. Four different approaches based on derivatization of alendronate with 9-fluorenylmethyl chloroformate (FMOC) have been reported and applied to pharmaceuticals Fluorescamine was utilized as derivatizing reagent for the determination of pamidronate in human whole blood Recently, LC-MS In some cases, manipulation of the pH of the mobile phase in RP-HPLC fails to separate mixtures of very polar organic compounds with ionic character. In these circumstances, ion-pair chromatography (IPC) is one of the most popular approaches to achieve efficient separations of such species. IPC can be easily performed by modifying the mobile phases used in the RP-HPLC using the same C Several biphosphonates such as alendronate, pamidronate, clodronate, etidronate and ibandronate, lack of chromophore groups. Therefore, quantitation of these compounds by IPC is possible after conversion into a detectable compound through derivatization protocols or directly using alternative detection modes such as evaporative light-scattering detection (ELSD). ELSD is a mass detector and thus it responds to all compounds that are sufficiently non-volatile in the detector chamber. The amount of light scattered is dependent on the size, shape and of course proportional to the analyte concentration. ELSD is based on the entirely volatilization of the mobile phase An IPC-ELSD method has been proposed by Jiang and Xie for the determination of ibandronate An IPC-ELSD method has also been reported by Niemi et al. Tetrabutyl ammonium hydrogen sulphate was proposed as ion-pair reagent for the separation of zoledronate from its impurities and degradation products generated from forced decomposition of the pharmaceutical samples Alternative IPC methods were developed for the quantitation of risedronate in pharmaceutical formulations The research group of den Hartigh and co-workers published two methods for the determination of pamidronate in urine samples Finally, al Deeb et al. Ion chromatography (IC), like other chromatographic techniques, is a separation technique used to analyze anions and cations in solution. The method is based on the same principles as HPLC where high-pressure pumps and columns are used for sample separation and analysis. During ion chromatography, a sample is injected into an eluent stream and carried through an ion-exchange column under high pressure. Different ions in the solution are separated based on their relative affinity to the column packing material Tsai et al. reported a simple IC procedure for the direct determination of alendronate in pharmaceuticals using a single-column approach with conductivity detection A similar assay utilizing the same ion-exchange column and detection system was developed for the quality control of pamidronate pharmaceuticals Alternative IC methods for the determination of alendronate Several IC methods are focused on the determination and purity control of clodronate The complex-formation reaction between bisphosphonates and metal ions has been utilized for the IC determination of olpadronate and pamidronate in pharmaceuticals Post-column derivatization was also employed by Daley-Yates et al. A recent, more sophisticated method for the determination of alendronate and etidronate involved hyphenation of IC with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) Indirect UV detection has proven to be a popular approach for the determination of bisphosphonates by ion chromatography Finally, indirect fluorescence detection has been employed for the analysis of bisphosphonates in biological samples The term capillary electrophoresis (CE), describes a family of techniques used to separate a variety of compounds. These analyses, all driven by an electric field, are performed in narrow tubes and can result in the rapid separation of great many different compounds. The versatility and number of ways that CE can be used means that almost all molecules and even whole organisms can be separated using powerful modes such as capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE), isotachophoresis, micellar electrokinetic chromatography (MEKC), isoelectric focussing and capillary electrochromatography (CEC). This makes them useful in situations where other liquid phase separation techniques are limited or impractical. The main advantages of capillary electrophoretic techniques include: high separation efficiencies, minute amounts of sample are required; it is easily automated and consumes limited amounts of reagents, generating low volumes of waste Zeller et al. reported the determination of pamidronate by capillary isotachophoresis using a PTFE separation capillary and a fused silica detection capillary Capillary zone electrophoresis has been applied to the determination of alendronate in pharmaceutical formulations by Tsai et al. An indirect UV-based CZE approach has been developed and applied to the separation and determination of by-products formed during clodronate synthesis, namely phosphate and phosphite A more detailed study also on the purity control of clodronate has been reported by Huikko and Kostiainen, using a more sophisticated setup such as CE coupled to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (CE-ESI-MS) Another recent application of capillary electrophoresis to the purity control of bisphosphonate pharmaceuticals involves ibandronate and its inorganic impurities An interesting multidimensional electrophoretic approach with significant potentials has been reported for the determination of alendronate and pamidronate Gas chromatography (GC) is undoubtedly the most widely used technique for the separation and analysis of volatile compounds. GC is one of the workhorse's techniques of many laboratories because it provides high separation efficiency, fast analysis, automation capabilities and generally requires a small sample injection volume. Additionally, the wide spectrum of commercially available specific or universal detectors provides the possibility of efficient detection schemes GC analysis of bisphosphonates is generally problematic. This originates from the ionic nature of these compounds resulting in broad and asymmetric chromatographic peaks. A typical approach to overcome this limitation is application of derivatization protocols using various reagents in organic medium Muntoni et al. reported a specific method for the determination of clodronate in human plasma and urine using GC with nitrogen–phosphorus detector (NPD). The analyte was extracted from biological samples using anion-exchange resin and derivatized with bis-trimethyl-silyl-trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) prior to the GC analysis. The assay was validated in terms of accuracy, precision, specificity and linearity and it was applied to pharmacokinetic studies A flame photometric (FPD)-based GC method has been proposed and applied to the separation and determination of pamidronate in human biological fluids GC-MS or GC-MS Less common applications reporting the determination of bisphosphonate drugs include techniques such as inductively coupled plasma (ICP) Reed et al. from Merck Research Laboratories took advantage of the phosphorus content of alendronate acid in order to develop an ICP-based assay for its determination in pharmaceutical tablets. The proposed method is simple, rapid and requires no derivatization steps. It is capable of determining the analyte in the range of 1.7–115 A voltammetric method reported recently for the determination of alendronate in pharmaceuticals and human plasma is based on the reaction of the analyte with Cu(II) released from a copper phosphate suspension, to form a soluble complex which is measured by anodic stripping voltammetry. The assay is adequately sensitive for bioanalytical purposes (LOD Potentiometric setup was utilized by de Haro Moreno et al. UV–vis spectrophotometric assays are frequently employed to pharmaceutical analysis due the wide availability, simplicity and cost-effectiveness of the required instrumentation. On this bases, Kuljanin et al. developed a method for the determination of alendronate based on the formation of a colored complex with Fe(III) in perchloric acid medium. The proposed assay is simple, adequately sensitive (LOD Automation is a key demand in modern analytical chemistry, especially in the cases of the quality control of pharmaceutical formulations were several samples have to be analyzed in the minimum of time. Continuous flow techniques offer certain advantages such as high-throughput assays, increased precision and accuracy and simple instrumentation and operation Two bioanalytical assays have been reported for the determination of zoledronate in biological material An ELISA method based on the use of biotinylated anti-phosphonate antibody attached to streptavidine-coated tubes for the ibandronate quantitation has been published by Endele et al. Generally, biological samples such as urine, blood serum or plasma, saliva, etc., cannot be directly injected into a separation system due to matrix complexity. To avoid this problem, a sequence of sample treatment steps is required prior to analysis. The main goals of sample pretreatment are to suppress matrix effects and enhance selectivity, convert the analytes to a compatible form for analysis depending on the technique and if possible increase sensitivity through preconcentration. In bisphosphonates pharmaceutical analysis and quality control, the pretreatment of the samples is relatively simple. Typically, it includes grounding, dilution and filtration (see references in Precipitation as calcium salts is an efficient and widely applied protocol for separation and isolation of bisphosphonates from biological matrices such as urine, plasma, serum and bones In order to enhance the efficiency of the procedure, double Following precipitation, the resulting solutions can be analyzed directly Solid phase extraction is widely used modern sample preparation technique as it offers significant advantages over traditional liquid–liquid extraction, automation capabilities, high recoveries, selectivity, preconcentration of the analytes, easy handling and higher throughput. Due to the ionic nature of bisphosphonates ion-exchange resins are the packings of choice in order to achieve efficient purification of the samples. The most widely applied functional group is the weak anion exchange diethyl amino group (DEA), either in conventional Less common but interesting approaches include the utilization of the silica based ion-exchange sorbent SAX for on-cartridge derivatization prior to LC-MS/MS Liquid–liquid extraction (LLE) is maybe the most classic sample preparation technique. Despite of its significant shortcomings including the use of toxic organic solvents, frequent formation of emulsions and lower sampling rate compared to SPE, LLE is still in many cases a technique of choice because of its simplicity and low-operational cost. LLE is applied to the analysis to the bisphosphonates in order to serve one main purpose. That is removal of the derivatizing reagent excess or its by-products prior to analysis. Typical examples include the cases of fluorescamine Bisphosphonates is a group of active pharmaceutical compounds that generally “gives a headache” to analytical chemists. The two phosphonic groups per molecule lend a strongly ionic character to these compounds and increased polarity. Additionally, the majority of the members of this family lacks of chromophores excluding convenient direct UV detection. Analysis of bisphosphonates can be classified in two major groups. QC of bisphosphonates-containing pharmaceuticals, including API assay and impurities profiling and the second the analysis of biological material such as urine, blood, plasma and bone samples. Each of these groups has its own demands in terms of sensitivity, selectivity, sample preparation and throughput. These demands more or less specify the techniques of choice. QC of pharmaceuticals requires usage of robust analytical techniques, preferably capable of both assay and impurities analysis. The LOD is generally not of primary importance, but simplicity, no complicated sample preparation, increased sampling rate and automation possibilities are desirable. A unique feature of bisphosphonates is the fact that their main impurities are ionic (phosphates and phosphites), limiting the applicability of traditional RP-HPLC. Ion chromatography is therefore an obvious solution to this analytical problem. Ion-exchange columns coupled to conductivity detection systems are an interesting approach, offering simplicity, avoidance of derivatization steps, adequate sensitivity and simultaneous separation of ionic impurities. Alternative approaches include indirect UV or fluorescence detection and ICP-MS although the availability of the latter in most QC laboratories is questionable. An interesting alternative to IC for impurities profiling of bisphosphonates is provided by capillary electrophoresis. The high separation efficiency of CE enables separation of both ionic and neutral species with simple modifications. Typical examples include indirect UV detection by adding suitable chromophore compounds in the background electrolyte. When it comes to assay analysis of pharmaceuticals the options are broadened. Practically, all the approaches reviewed in this article are more or less suitable for this purpose ( On the other hand, determination of bisphosphonates in biological samples such as urine, plasma and bones requires highly sensitive and selective methods. In such protocols, sample preparation is of key importance as it influences both selectivity trough effective matrix removal and sensitivity through preconcentration. The most widely accepted and applied strategy for pretreatment of bisphosphonates-containing biological samples prior to liquid chromatographic analysis is precipitation as calcium salts from alkaline solutions. Such protocols have been proven quite effective, but require several steps and are time consuming. Alternative approaches include SPE or combination of both when increased selectivity is required. When it comes to gas chromatographic analysis, SPE through anion-exchange columns seems to be the technique of choice. An interesting method requiring minimal sample pretreatment is two-dimensional capillary electrophoresis, where a first isotachophoresis step is used for sample preparation coupled to analytical CE for quantitative analysis. From the sensitivity point of view, pre-column derivatization offers many possibilities for determination of bisphosphonates at the low-ppb range using liquid or gas chromatography ( Sensitive approaches also include mass spectrometric detectors coupled either to reversed phase or ion pairing chromatography. Although LC-MS and LC-MS/MS nowadays predominate in bio-analyses, applications of these techniques to the determination of bisphosphonates are limited and relevant research should be expected in the future. The most obvious reason is the incompatibility of the mobile phases used in ion-exchange chromatography and ion-pair HPLC to the mass-spectrometric detectors. The limited choice of volatile additives generally results in poor peak shape and retention The authors wish to thank the reviewers for scrutinizing this manuscript. Their comments improved its quality.