Dislocation of the lunate and proximal pole of the scaphoid with displacement of the fragments proximal to the radiocarpal joint, characterized as a total dislocation, is very rare, with only six cases reported. Dislocated lunate are generally located around the radiocarpal joint or within carpal ligament. However, there have been no reports of dislocated lunate over the carpal ligament. We present a patient with volar dislocation of the lunate that featured extreme migration to approximately 6 cm proximal to flexor digitorum superficialis through the transcarpal ligament.Transscaphoid volar lunate dislocation is very rare, A 30-year-old, right-handed male sustained an isolated injury to the left wrist after falling down the stairs. The left wrist was painful, swollen, and tender to palpation. The hand was neurovascularly intact, with no sensory deficit in the distribution of the median nerve. Wrist motion was limited and a palpable mass-like lesion about 2 × 3 × 3 cm in size was observed on the mid-portion of the forearm. Plain posteroanterior and lateral radiograms of the left wrist revealed volar transscaphoid fracture and lunate dislocation. The proximal fragment of the scaphoid was displaced along with the lunate in a volar direction, and the lunate had migrated to approximately 6 cm proximal to the flexor digitorum superficialis through the transcarpal ligament ( With the patient under general anesthesia, the dislocated lunate was removed from the forearm area. The carpal tunnel was initially released through a volar approach and the carpal bones were exposed, then the lunate and proximal pole of the scaphoid were reduced ( Transscaphoid volar lunate dislocation is an uncommon injury. The mechanisms of perilunate dislocation are extension, ulnar deviation, and intercarpal supination, while intercarpal supination is a major component. This injury can be divided into a lesser-arc injury and a greater-arc injury. Previous reports showed one of the two types of injury. Accurate fracture reduction and union, interosseous ligament repair or reconstruction is critical in the restoration of the intercarpal stability and obtaining a good result. The last follow-up X-ray revealed limited areas of avascular necrosis of the lunate without any collapse. Other authors reported a higher incidence of avascular necrosis of lunate or scaphoid (44%) in case of transscaphoid lunate or perilunate dislocation. In previous reports, the lunate did not pass the palmar transcarpal ligament because it is a very strong structure and there is no space under the palmar transcarpal ligament. However, this case uniquely featured an extreme proximal migration of the dislocated lunate over the carpal ligament. In conclusion, the treatment of extreme proximal migration of the dislocated lunate over the carpal ligament is needed open reduction and internal fixation with a combine dorsal and volar approach for complete ligament reconstruction avoiding complications such as reduction loss or avascular necrosis. This study was supported by a grant from the