Ash residues that arise during combustion of solid fuels form deposits on heat exchanger surfaces which hinder the heat transfer to the working fluid steam. The thermal conductivity and – especially within the combustion chamber – the optical properties of the deposits determine the transferred amount of heat. Thus, knowledge of the optical properties, here represented by the normal emittance, are crucial for the design and operation of a steam generator.
                  Since the emittance is dependent on both the physical structure of the surface as well as the mineralogical composition, both parameters are subject to the current investigation. In the work presented the spectral normal emittances of mineral samples as well as their dependence on both the chemical composition and physical structure were investigated experimentally. In the course of the research the degree of complexity was increased gradually. Starting with pure quartz sand the influence of the surface structure on emittance has been investigated. By mixing quartz and hematite powder the influence of chemical enrichment with this typical ash component has been investigated. Measurements with real coal ashes complete the experimental program. Additionally, the latter samples were undergone thermal treatment to investigate the effect of particle agglomeration and melting.Slaggings and foulings form thermal insulations on heat exchanger surfaces that hinder the heat transfer to the working fluid steam. Accordingly, these surfaces have to undergo regular cleaning procedures. The heat insulation characteristics of the coverings are on the one hand caused by the rather low thermal conductivities of ashes in the order of 1 Experience shows that even very thin coatings on heat exchanger surfaces can lead to a significant decrease in absorbed heat and thus to an increase of furnace exit temperature (see Gwodsz et al. Since the reflectance of a surface – and hence also the emissivity – is affected by both its physical structure and its chemical composition the question arises which is the dominant influence. The goal of the current article is to contribute to the clarification of this question. In the course of this article “emissivity” is used for theoretical values derived from electromagnetic wave theory or Mie scattering theory, whereas “emittance” is used for measured values of real surfaces. In the current paper the normal emittance perpendicular to the sample surface is measured and not the hemispherical or the angular distribution of emittance. However, because typical ash oxides behave like dielectrics which show low angular dependency of emittance the normal emittance is a good first estimate for the hemispherical emittance (a typical correlation: hemispherical emittance normal emittance 0.92, see for example Wall The importance of the exact knowledge of ash emittance for reliable design and CFD assisted lay-out of industrial boilers is highlighted for example in Mulcahy et al. Boow and Goard Since the emittances of the synthetic slags enriched with Fe Further experimental results were provided by Markham et al. Similar experimental results were reported by Zygarlicke et al. In more recent research, Shimogori et al. Finally, Wall et al. According to the theory of electromagnetic waves the properties transmissivity, reflectivity and absorptivity of a medium are described by its complex refractive index However, ashes and slags do not form optically smooth surfaces; instead they are rough and composed of small particles. In order to describe the interaction of radiation with particles, scattering effects like reflection, refraction and especially diffraction have to be taken into consideration. These effects can be quantitatively described by the Mie scattering theory which introduces the particle parameter The array of curves in The particles are separated into two size fractions with 20 The calculations for each size fraction have been carried out for four different complex refractive indices as shown in The diagram in The Mie scattering theory describes the propagation of monochromatic electromagnetic waves incident on a single homogenous sphere. It is thus a strongly idealized theory that is based on certain assumptions and cannot be applied to real ash particles and slags without further restrictions. It is, however, able to predict general correlations. A motivation of the work presented here was to confirm the predictions of the Mie scattering theory regarding the influence of particle size and chemical compositions on emittance by experiments with real and synthetic ashes and slags All experiments described in this article have been carried out using the radiation test rig of the department of energy plant technology (LEAT) at the Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany The heating element is a vertical, hollow cylindrical electric furnace which is used to heat both the sample and the reference radiator up to the measuring temperatures between 500 The samples are cylindrical with a diameter of 22 The reference radiator (black body) is made of a heat resistant nickel-based alloy and laid out as a cylindrical cavity radiator with an inner diameter of 50 Radiation measurements are carried out by a spectrometer system which is based on a Czerny-Turner grating monochromator and two semiconductor detectors. The thermal radiation emitted by the sample (or the reference radiator, respectively) passes through an optical access in the top insulation and hits a gold-plated off-axis parabolic mirror that focusses the radiation signal onto the entrance slit of the monochromator system. In front of this slit the signal is periodically intercepted by a chopper, which by this means imposes a modulation of known frequency and phase on the signal. This modulation is synchronized with a lock-in amplifier which in turn provides for a high signal-to-noise ratio. Inside the monochromator the radiation is collimated by a curved mirror and diffracted by one of three gratings. The gratings (each with a different grating constant) are mounted on a rotatable platform. The dispersed radiation is then reflected by another mirror and refocused on the exit slit where it is measured either by an InSb or MCT-detector depending on wavelength. To avoid superimposition of diverse diffraction maxima of different wavelengths a filter wheel with six edge filters is inserted into the optical path. A laser pointer is used prior to the measurements for the precise alignment of the spectrometer with the sample. The determination of the spectral normal emittances is based on a static radiation comparison method, in which the ratios of the detected radiance signals emitted vertically by the sample The spectral emittances are determined for sample temperatures between 500 To keep matters simple, results are only presented in form of total emittances in this article. The influence of statistic errors, e.g. standard uncertainties of the thermocouples or statistic noise in the detector signal, on the measurement results are in the order of 2% and are considered negligible. Note that it has been assumed that the thermocouple measurement within the sample reflects the surface temperature of the sample which is only a first order assumption. Because of the surface heat loss by radiation the measured sample temperature is always higher than its actual surface temperature and as a consequence the sample emittances are underestimated (up to 10% at the highest measurement temperatures). It has been refrained from correcting the emittance values because thermal conductivity of the individual samples is unknown. However, while this effect is present in each single measurement, the arrangements of the measuring series and the conclusions derived from them are still valid. Further details of the error estimation can be found in In order to investigate the influence of the surface structure on the emittance of chemically identical media, samples have been prepared from different particle size fractions of pure quartz sand (SiO In the course of this research project emittance measurements of the products F36, Millisil W3, Millisil W8, Millisil W10, und Millisil W12 of the Quarzwerke GmbH, Frechen, Germany have been carried out. Each product corresponds to a different particle size fraction. Particle size analyses of all fractions have been carried out using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. The results of these measurements are summarized in form of the median diameter and the 90% quantile in The diagram in These findings are in good agreement with experimental results published by Boow and Goard By means of regressions methods the following correlation has been found which allows for an approximation of the emittance of quartz sand based on temperature This correlation matches the one reported by Boow and Goard In order to investigate the influence of chemical composition on emittance, additional samples were prepared based on quartz sand Millisil W8 which was enriched with 2% and 30% of hematite powder, respectively. Hematite has been selected for the chemical enrichment, because it is chemically stable under the experimental conditions present in the current study and it is also among the typical main ingredients of ashes and slags. Furthermore it is declared a “coloring agent” in relevant literature In addition to the powder samples sintered specimens have been prepared by exposing the powder mixtures to a temperature of 1600 The results of the emittance measurements of the powder samples and the sintered bodies prepared of quartz sand and hematite powder are shown in the diagram in This result coincides with the theoretical predictions of the single particle emissivities in Further analyses by means of Hg porosimetry have shown that the porosity of the sintered specimen with 2% and 30% Fe As a conclusion, the measuring series so far have shown that the chemical composition and thus the complex refractive index have little influence on the emittance of fine powder samples. Though, once the samples undergo thermal treatment and thus experience sintering the influence of chemical composition becomes visible. In a final measuring series the emittances of ashes of usual power plant coals as well as the effect of thermal treatment on them have been investigated. In a first step the coals have been reduced to ashes under normative conditions at a temperature of 815 The measured elementary compositions of both ashes are given in In the relevant range of values found here (<0.5) a higher value of The photographs in The diagrams in The sintered bodies prepared at 1200 These findings are again in good agreement with experimental results published by Boow and Goard Interestingly the sintered bodies prepared at 1400 In contrast, the “Steam Coal High Sulfur (USA)” sample sintered at 1400 Subsequent to the emittance measurements porosimetry analyses of the sintered bodies have been carried out. Unfortunately, the samples prepared at 1400 Both the experimental results as well as the theoretical considerations show the complexity of the effects of physical structure and chemical composition on the emittance of ashes and slags. It has been reported that ashes composed of fine particles with small mean diameters show a high reflectance of radiant heat and thus reduces the efficiency of heat exchanger surfaces. This is in agreement with the analytical results of the Mie scattering theory for strongly simplified particle systems. It could be experimentally confirmed by measurements of pure quartz sand samples in which the sample with the smallest mean diameter featured the lowest emittance and thus the highest reflectance. In turn, the efficiency of heat exchanger surfaces increases when the ashes covering it are composed of particles with higher mean diameters, at least as long as other boundary conditions such as the mineralogical composition and thermal conductivity of the material remain constant. For pure quartz sand samples even quantitative correlations between the emittance and mean particle diameter and temperature could be derived. According to Mie scattering theory the detailed chemical composition is of secondary importance for the emittance of fine powders. Accordingly, only a weak influence of hematite enrichment could be detected for samples based on Millisil W8 quartz sand which is still a rather fine powder. After sintering, however, a distinct effect on emittance could be measured. This effect is attributed to particle agglomeration and growth so the effect of chemical composition becomes more visible as predicted by the Mie scattering theory. Emittance measurements of laboratory ashes have confirmed the results obtained for pure substance mixtures. While the emittance values of the powdery ashes are all similar to each other and on a rather low level the samples sintered at 1200 The two ash samples sintered at 1400 In the next steps investigations of surfaces with exactly known geometrical properties (e.g. microstructured surfaces) will be required to further refine the correlation found between surface morphology and emittance. Furthermore, quantification of these effects for real ashes from operating power plants is still pending. The authors acknowledge financial support by the