In general, the poor flotation behavior of ultrafine (<10µm) particles is mainly associated with a low particle/bubble collision efficiency within the flotation process due to an unfavorable particle/bubble size ratio. In those considerations the size of the gangue particles is usually not considered. This study investigates the effect of gangue particle size on the recovery of ultrafine and fine (10–50µm) particles. Artificial, binary model particle systems, with magnetite as the target mineral and quartz as the gangue mineral, are used in this study in order to minimize reported issues associated with ultrafine gangue particles. Results indicate that ultrafine magnetite can be recovered similar to fine magnetite when the gangue particles are fine as well. In contrast, fine magnetite recovery drops significantly when ultrafine quartz is used as the gangue mineral system. This should thus open a discussion of a reconsideration of the collision efficiency models to incorporate the effect of the gangue particles.Froth flotation is one of the most widely used separation techniques in mineral processing. It is a heterocoagulation process where target mineral particles within an aqueous pulp selectively attach to air bubbles, forming particle/bubble aggregates, which are subsequently transported out of the pulp into a froth phase. All these sub-processes occur under appropriate hydrodynamic conditions. As the air bubbles mainly differentiate between hydrophobic and hydrophilic surface properties, the process selectivity is essentially based on differences in wetting properties of the solid particles suspended in the pulp ( One of the often discussed phenomena of the flotation process is the influence of the particle size to the flotation response. There is a typical particle size/recovery relationship observed in many investigations. The flotation process works best in a quite narrow particle size range (approximately 10–100 To our knowledge, gangue particle sizes do not play any significant role in the models for particle/bubble collision efficiency reported in literature. Except a negative impact on pulp rheology in the case of higher solid contents ( Unselective transport into the froth zone through entrainment and entrapment, Increase froth formation and stability, Contamination of the aqueous pulp phase due to an increased dissolution of disturbing ions followed by collector passivation through ion/collector interaction and/or precipitation on mineral surfaces, Unselective collector adsorption due to high surface free energies and Slime coating of target and gangue particles and air bubbles. In this paper an investigation on the effect of gangue particle size on the recovery of fine (10–50 The minerals chosen to generate the binary model particle systems for the flotation experiments are magnetite (MAG), as the target mineral, and quartz (QRZ), as the gangue mineral. The MAG sample is from an unknown location. XRD analysis yielded 80% Fe Flotation reagents include sodium oleate (NaOl) from Carl Roth as the collector, 4-Methyl-2-pentanol (MIBC) from Sigma Aldrich as the frother, and aqueous solutions of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) from Carl Roth as pH modifiers. The water used for the flotation experiments is tap water (Freiberg, Germany), which is analyzed prior to and after each experiment with ICP-OES (Thermo Scientific iCAPTM 6300) in order to measure the concentrations of Fe, Mg and Ca ions. The average initial concentrations of these ions in the tap water used are 0 Single-stage, laboratory-scale froth flotation experiments are performed using a GTK LabCell (Outotec). A two liter cell is used with a rotor speed of 1000 The four different mineral particle size fractions, MAG(f), MAG(uf), QRZ(f) and QRZ(uf), are used to create four artificial, binary feed particle systems, namely: a fine system “f-f”, with MAG(f) and QRZ(f), an ultrafine system “uf-uf”, with MAG(uf) and QRZ(uf), a fine system containing mostly ultrafine target particles “uf-f”, with MAG(uf) and QRZ(f), and an ultrafine system containing mostly fine target particles “f-uf”, with MAG(f) and QRZ(uf). The magnetite feed grade In order to characterize the heterocoagulation tendency of the MAG and QRZ particles during the flotation experiments, electrophoretic mobility measurements (Malvern Zetasizer Nano) are performed using the MAG(uf) and QRZ(uf) fractions. Deionized water is used with a salt background of either 10 As mentioned before, the reasons considered to be mainly responsible for the problems of the froth flotation process (low recovery and grade) associated with ultrafine particles are the lower target particle/air bubble collision efficiency, entrainment of ultrafine gangue particles, slime coating, increased froth formation and stabilization, increased dissolution of disturbing ions due to higher specific surfaces, increase of pulp viscosity and increased collector consumption ( A relatively low solid content of ∼13 The anionic surfactant NaOl is chosen as the collector, because chemisorption could take place onto the MAG surface due to covalent binding to ferric surface ions ( Using the  Due to the carefully chosen flotation parameters the following assertions can be made for influences of the flotation responses: The same hydrodynamic conditions (cell size, rotor type, size and speed, air flow, frother dosage, bubble size distributions, etc.) are applied to all experiments Negative rheology effects caused by high amounts of ultrafine particles are limited by the relatively low solid content in the pulp Slime coating effects can be neglected by floating in a slightly alkaline pH, No dissolution of high amounts of process disturbing ions (like Fe, Mg and Ca) is taking place, especially for the ultrafine feed fractions Partial adsorption of NaOl onto QRZ surfaces is negated by the preferential interaction between NaOl and MAG Froth effects are minimized by emphasizing pulp recovery. In The subscript Examining In order to assess the influence of entrainment to the observed flotation results, When only looking at the results of the f-f and uf-uf systems, it can be seen that they agree with the classic, well-known effect of decreasing recovery and/or grade with decreasing particle size ( However, looking at the results from the other two feed systems, f-uf and uf-f, that hypothesis cannot be applied anymore. The relatively high recovery of ultrafine MAG particles into the concentrate for the uf-f feed system seems to be in disagreement with the reported collision efficiency models. The reduced particle/bubble size ratio should lead to a clear decrease in the particle/bubble collision efficiency, and thus, to a decrease in MAG(uf) recovery when applying the same experimental conditions. By looking at the obtained results, the MAG(uf) recoveries for the uf-f system are only slightly lower than the MAG(f) recoveries for the f-f system. Therefore, the calculated flotation rate constants, as well as the estimated maximum recoveries In order to explain the observed flotation responses and taking into consideration the selected experimental parameters, the hypothesis can be formulated that the particle size distribution of the gangue particles affects the collection of target particles by air bubbles even at low volume solid content. For the experimental parameters chosen in this study, decreasing the QRZ particle size range leads to an increase in the number of QRZ particles present in the pulp. Due to their hydrophilic nature, the fraction of high surface free energy sites in the system consequently increases as well. Reported investigations indicate that the reduction of those high energy sites, due to collector adsorption for example, can essentially promote the particle/bubble collection ( In this study, we investigated the effects of gangue mineral particle size on the recovery of fine (10–50 Negligible heterocoagulation between magnetite and quartz, Negligible increase of pulp viscosity, Negligible collector adsorption on gangue particles, Negligible froth recovery influences (focus on pulp recovery) and Negligible release of process disturbing ions. Therefore, magnetite recoveries should be mainly affected by magnetite/bubble collision efficiency. The following conclusions could be made based on the flotation response of the four feed systems investigated: Fine magnetite particles are efficiently collected by air bubbles in the flotation cell if the quartz particles are in the fine size range as well Ultrafine magnetite particles are inefficiently collected by air bubbles in the flotation cell if the quartz particles are in the ultrafine size range as well Ultrafine quartz particles significantly reduces the concentrate grade due to enhanced entrainment capability Ultrafine magnetite particles are collected by air bubbles in the flotation cell with nearly similar efficiency as fine magnetite particles if the quartz particles are in the fine size range Fine magnetite particle recovery drops significantly if the quartz particles are in the ultrafine size range The effects of the last two observations are not explainable with the classic collision efficiency modelling approaches. We assume that an increased number of ultrafine hydrophilic gangue particles can restrain the particle/bubble collision efficiency. If those particles are not present in the pulp, even ultrafine target particles could be efficiently collected by relatively large air bubbles. It seems that the target particle/air bubble ratio is not the only parameter governing the particle/bubble collision efficiency. It also indicates that lower particle size limits for floatability are partly questionable because the efficiency difficulties reported for ultrafine particle recovery may be to some extent caused by hydrodynamic changes induced by the hydrophilic gangue particles, as these usually represent the major portion of the particles. Certainly, there is not one single dominating sub-process explaining the flotation response of every feed system, due to the complex interplay of sub-processes. Furthermore, if the aforementioned sub-processes occur or not and which of them are dominating cannot usually be said with certainty. But the assumption that ultrafine hydrophilic gangue particles, or through their presence induced changes within the hydrodynamic conditions, are able to hinder the particle/bubble collision efficiency, even at relatively low solid contents, to our knowledge, has not been considered yet for the description of flotation efficiencies. Further investigations are necessary in order to confirm and evaluate these results and potentially integrate them into efficiency modelling approaches. The authors thank Mrs. Kästner and Mrs. Volkmar, both from Prof. Dr.-Ing. Urs A. Peuker’s lab, for conducting granulometric measurements and their assistance with ICP-OES analyses. Further thanks go to Klaus Gräbe, Martin Krüger and Dr. Robert Möckel from the Helmholtz Institute Freiberg for Resource Technology for their assistance with the testwork and sample preparation assistance as well as XRD analysis.