The extraction of yttrium from chloride medium with a mixture of 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-(2-ethylhexyl) ester (HEHEHP, H2A2) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex272, H2B2) in kerosene has been studied. The extraction mechanism was determined by the methods of slope analysis and constant mole. The maximum synergistic enhancement factor of 2.94 was obtained at a HEHEHP/Cyanex272 molar ratio of 1:1. It was found that yttrium was extracted with the synergistic system in the form of Y(HB2)(HA2)2. It is very different from the extraction forms of YH2ClA4 and YH2ClB4 when extracted by HEHEHP and Cyanex272 alone system, respectively. The effects of chloride ion on the yttrium extraction were also studied and the extracted complexes in the organic solution were determined by the infrared spectrum method. It was confirmed that the extraction was via a cation exchange mechanism.With the development of advanced materials, rare earths (REs) and their compounds become more and more important owing to their unique properties. Separation and purification of REs to achieve their pure products suitable to various demands have gained increasing attentions in the rare earth industry. Solvent extraction is a well-established method for metal separations and purifications. Recently, a number of extractants have been applied to the rare earth separations and among them acidic organophosphorus extractants are more widely used. HEHEHP and Cyanex272 are two of the typical acidic organophosphorus extractants ( Synergistic extraction can improve the extraction efficiency in the solvent extraction applications ( Cyanex272 with a purity of > The aqueous solution pH was first adjusted to the desired values with hydrochloric acid and monitored with Mettler Toledo pH electrode LE438 series coupled with the InLab Routine pH meter. At the desired initial solution pH, the appropriate extraction rate (20%–90%) was processed to get the accurate linear relation between lgD and eq. pH. Otherwise, if the extraction rate is too high or too low, the concentration of Y After phase separation, the concentration of yttrium in the aqueous phase was analyzed by EDTA titration at pH Yttrium extraction by HEHEHP and Cyanex272 alone systems was first studied by a conventional slope analysis method. The plots of logD versus pH at constant extractant concentrations are shown in Based on the slope analysis, the Y The synergistic enhancement factor (R) is usually used to evaluate the synergistic effect of a mixed organic system. In order to study the synergistic effect of the mixture of HEHEHP and Cyanex272 for Y Considering the chloride ion taking part in the extraction by HEHEHP and Cyanex272 alone systems, we suppose that the extraction of Y The distribution ratio (  The equilibrium constant ( We can get Eq. Take the logarithm of Eqs. The coefficients The influence of different initial concentration of chloride ion on the synergistic extraction reaction was also studied. As shown in The plot of logD The extraction of Y In order to further confirm the composition of the extracted complexes, infrared spectrum measurement was conducted ( As shown in The mixture of HEHEHP and Cyanex272 showed a synergistic effect for Y Financial aid from the following programs is gratefully acknowledged: the key program of the