In this study, an alternative method was investigated for the recovery of copper and selenium from copper anode slimes, supplied from Sarkuysan Co. in Turkey. The proposed process was composed of two hydrometallurgical steps; decopperization in H2SO4 medium and dissolution of selenium into NaOH solution. The effects of oxygen flow rate and solution temperature on the decopperization of anode slimes were examined in H2SO4 medium and copper recovery was achieved with an efficiency of 94%. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis revealed Cu2Se as a remaining phase of copper in anode slimes after the decopperization process. Following the decopperization stage, anode slimes were treated with NaOH solution in order to dissolve selenium. The influences of NaOH concentration, temperature and various types of oxidants on selenium dissolution were inspected. The uniqueness of this technique is that it provides to have an efficiency of selenium recovery as high as 86.8% in an alkaline solution (4M NaOH) under atmospheric conditions without requiring an autoclave.Coming directly from anodes as insoluble compounds Reacting with the electrolyte to produce insoluble compounds Anode slimes are valuable by-products in the electrolytic copper refining process. Impurities in anode slimes can be classified into the groups based on their electrochemical potentials and chemical behaviors ( Copper anode slimes from electrolytic copper refineries are now supplying the source of most of the world's selenium due to its significant contents considering high costs and technical difficulties of extraction from its ores. Many process combinations, namely pyro–hydro, hydro–pyro, hydro–hydro, and hydro–electro metallurgical methods have been experienced for the recovery of copper and/or other valuable metals from the slimes ( Decopperization of anode slimes is the first stage of selenium recovery processes. Several techniques have been developed for decopperization, and the most popular ones are by dissolving after sulfatizing or oxidizing roasting, by leaching in concentrated sulfuric acid solution or by dissolving under oxygen pressure ( On the other hand, hydrometallurgical processes are more promising compared to pyrometallurgical options in terms of cost effectiveness and environmental concerns. Alkali leaching under pressure or atmospheric conditions, wet chlorination, solvent extraction, and vacuum distillation have been so far developed in hydrometallurgy to recover selenium ( The aim of the present study is to develop an alternative recovery method for both selenium and copper by designing an economical and most importantly continuous system with high efficiency. The effects of process parameters were examined in a systematic manner. In addition, the kinetics of selenium dissolution was investigated to determine a proper reaction kinetic model. Gold and other PGMs were enriched in the anode slimes during the process. A sample of anode slimes (Courtesy of Sarkuysan Copper, Turkey) was first ground to below 300 Two hydrometallurgical procedures were applied to recover selenium from the slime; decopperization in H In decopperization, 100 Chemical analyses of the solutions were carried out by AAS to measure the contents of copper and selenium; and the residual solid samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine the main phases. The proposed procedure for the treatment of copper anode slime to recover both copper and selenium is summarized in The homogenized and characterized anode slime was used for the first step of recovery process; decopperization. Effects of relevant parameters such as; oxygen requirement, oxygen flow rate and reaction temperature are reported below. The required amount of oxygen to dissolve copper in the slime was initially examined at constant parameters: 80 In this series of experiment, oxygen was also used instead of air in order to shorten the leaching time and to increase the recovery rate of copper in the slime. The effect of oxygen on the dissolution of copper is given in As shown clearly, the sufficient amount of oxygen was essential to dissolve copper with relatively high recovery rate. The maximum recovery of copper at ~ The influence of oxygen flow rate on the recovery of copper was investigated in a range of 2–4 2 A negligible amount of selenium (~%0.20 of total selenium) was dissolved from the slimes at the given conditions. The effect of temperature on the dissolution of copper was investigated at the temperature ranges of 25–90 The high Cu recovery rate observed in the first 5 The results of XRD and chemical analyses of decopperized anode slimes revealed that regardless of the leaching parameters (i.e., temperature and flow rate), the dissolution of copper became limited beyond 90 The decopperized anode slime was treated with NaOH solution in the second stage to get selenium based on the dissolution reactions (Eqs. The composition of reaction products depends not only on the oxidation behavior of different selenium compounds, but also on the oxidation capability of the oxidant. In this part of the study, the decopperized anode slime with the composition presented in The effect of alkali concentration on the extraction of selenium was inspected in the concentration range of 0.36 to 5 Selenium recovery rate reached its maximum value; ~ The influence of leaching temperature on selenium extraction was inspected at temperatures ranging from 40 to 90 The leaching kinetics of selenium dissolution was analyzed according to the Shrinking-core model which is the most accepted model for the kinetics of fluid–solid reactions ( The plot of 1 The rate constants (k) for different temperatures (T) were calculated from the slopes of the straight lines in The influences of different oxidants, namely potassium permanganate, hydrogen peroxide, oxygen and combinations of them, were studied to determine the importance of oxidant for the dissolution of selenium. This series of experiments was carried out at the same temperature, 60 The highest dissolution rates were obtained with the usage of both oxygen and the combination of KMnO The addition of H In this study, the recovery of copper and selenium from copper anode slimes was investigated in a laboratory scale and the results of this research could be summarized as the following; The presence of oxygen or other oxidants was essential for dissolving copper and selenium with relatively high recoveries. The extraction of copper and selenium from anode slimes was increased with increasing leaching temperature. However, the dissolution rate of copper and selenium did not significantly change at and above 60 Oxygen was the most suitable oxidant for the recovery of both copper and selenium. Flow rate of oxygen at 2 Selenium recovery reached its maximum (~ The leaching conditions for extracting 94% of copper were optimized as 2 The ideal conditions for extracting 86% of selenium were determined as 4