The NIST Virtual Cement and Concrete Testing Laboratory (VCCTL) is used to simulate the influence of particle shape on the hydration kinetics and setting of portland cement. Building on previous work in reconstructing particle shapes from real cements, real-shape particles are used to produce three-dimensional digitized cement paste microstructures, and the hydration of these microstructures is tracked using VCCTL. The degree of hydration and percolation of solids is monitored and compared to experimental data at several water–cement ratios. The simulations predict that shapes of particles influence cement hydration in two ways: the additional surface/volume ratio relative to spherical particles results in greater rates of hydration, and the anisometry in shape influences the degree of hydration at which the particles and hydration products percolate to form a stiff three-dimensional network.A recent paper The availability of real-shape cement particle representations makes it possible to investigate the effects of these shapes on the hydration and setting of cement paste. Cement powders are produced by intergrinding larger clinker and calcium sulfate particles to achieve a desired fineness. Variation in the grinding method, e.g., ball milling versus roller milling, may produce quantitatively different particle shapes, at any given fineness, because the grinding geometry and comminution mechanisms can be different. Additionally, the type and dosage of grinding aids may also influence particle shapes, especially when supplementary cementitious materials are present Answering these questions experimentally is complicated by the difficulty in controlling particle shape during the grinding process. Analytical models of hydration kinetics, such as the dispersion model of Knudsen This paper uses the NIST Virtual Cement and Concrete Testing Laboratory (VCCTL) models VCCTL was used to generate digitized 3-D microstructures of cement pastes formed from the cement CCRL-116, produced as a proficiency sample by the Cement and Concrete Reference Laboratory. The volume fractions and surface area fractions of the various phases are given in Other than its chemical composition, the surface area of a cement is probably the most important factor influencing its early-age hydration rate. Therefore, it is important to know how closely the computed surface areas of the microstructures generated by VCCTL approximate the experimentally measured value for the cement in question. In this study, the surface area of CCRL-116 was obtained from three different experimental techniques. The first technique for measuring surface area uses multipoint adsorption isotherms for nitrogen (BET) on a known mass of the powder. The powder was outgassed at 105 The third technique for measuring specific surface area is the Blaine air permeability technique prescribed by the ASTM C204 standard test method Particle populations, matching the measured particle size distribution (PSD) of CCRL-116, were randomly placed in a 200 There is only one cement from which particle shape data have been extracted and analyzed so far For placing spherical particles, a random parking procedure was used which has been employed previously in numerous studies The smallest particle that can be included by the digitization approach is 1 voxel in size, i.e. 1 Other than the particle placement technique, detailed procedures for reconstructing the phase fractions and distributions in 3-D cement paste microstructures with VCCTL are quite similar to those described elsewhere VCCTL was used to simulate the hydration and development of each of the microstructures. Saturated conditions were simulated in which the capillary pore water consumed by hydration was continually replenished. The curing temperature was assumed constant at 25 In microstructures generated from random particle placement, the finite size of the system might cause undesirable variation in results between samples. To avoid this, only systems with dimensions of 200  The average values of SSA calculated from the PSD exceed that measured by the Blaine method by 24%. An estimate of the uncertainty in the value reported by BET is not available. However, SSA values measured by BET are typically two or three times greater than that measured by the other two methods because nitrogen adsorption measures contributions to the surface area due to surface roughness and any internal porosity that is accessible from the particle surface One way of quantifying the differences in the initial VCCTL microstructures is to compute their SSAs. The table shows that, as expected, microstructures constructed with real-shape particles have SSAs that are about 12% higher than those constructed using spheres. This additional surface area for digitized real-shape particles is consistent with the average value reported for the excess surface area of a large number of real-shape particles reconstructed by SH expansion from the same data set  Direct comparisons between the computed surface areas of VCCTL microstructures and experimentally measured values are complicated both by the loss of surface area due to interparticle contact in the digital images and by surface artifacts introduced by digitization of the particles. The digitization artifacts are well-known and have been quantified for spherical particles  Influences of the initially higher surface area of real-shape particles are observed quantitatively when the degree of hydration is examined as a function of age. In At lower  Curves for real-shape particles fit the data better than the curves for spherical particles in At least two studies have shown that setting, as measured by the Vicat needle method The predicted beginning of set is about 50 Haecker et al. Because the predictions of VCCTL related to kinetics are sensitive to the  Digital-image modeling of cement microstructure, hydration, and properties has been studied extensively for the last 15 years. The advantages and limitations of the digital-image method are now pretty well understood and have been reported First, the resolution limit of the image grid restricts the smallest particles that can be resolved explicitly. In the case of VCCTL, this resolution limit is 1 Digitization introduces considerable artifacts to the surfaces of particles. For example, in two dimensions a digital circle always has 4 Percolation phenomena, which are primarily responsible for setting behavior and trends in the transport properties of cement pastes, also have been examined extensively with digital-image models The hydration and setting behavior of microstructures made from real-shape particles are predicted by VCCTL to be significantly different from that of spherical-particle microstructures. One reason for the differences is the differences in specific surface area between the two types of microstructure. Less obviously, the geometric differences between real-shape particles and spheres are predicted to influence the microstructure properties at a given degree of hydration. Compared to spheres, the formation of a 3-D percolating network of solids occurs at a lower degree of hydration when real particle shapes are used. These predicted particle shape effects naturally lead to a consideration of whether it is worthwhile to include real particle shapes in microstructural models of cement paste. For one thing, much of the influence of the increased surface area of real particle shapes can be artificially masked by adjusting the value of the time conversion factor For modeling the overall kinetics of hydration with VCCTL, the increases in predictive capability may not justify the extra effort required to obtain and use particle shape data. But other properties of cement paste, such as setting time and early-age elastic moduli, are much more sensitive to particle shape Currently, little is known about the influences of clinker grinding parameters on particle shape The authors thank Dale Bentz and Vanessa Peterson for thoughtfully reviewing the paper and providing valuable comments. Max Peltz is gratefully acknowledged for performing the BET and PSD measurements.