A detailed experimental study is described which was conducted to determine the rate of oxygen gas–liquid mass transfer within the packed bed of heap bioleach reactors at different temperatures (22–68°C), using the Na2SO3 method. The raw data was analysed using a simplified film mass transfer model, making corrections for oxygen solubility in concentrated solution and for increased water vapour partial pressure at elevated temperatures. The results compared favourably against two independent experimental leach studies, indicating kLa values between 33 and 46h−1. The value varied with the particle size distribution of the packing, with kLa assuming larger values for those packings that had a higher fines contents. While kLa increases with temperature, the solubility of oxygen decreases simultaneously, resulting in net mass transfer rates being relatively unaffected by temperature in the range studied. This indicates that thermophile heap bioleach reactors are likely to operate under gas–liquid mass transfer limitations, especially at high altitude.Oxygen is the primary reactant in the oxidative dissolution of sulphide minerals as it occurs in heap (bio)leaching, regardless of whether this is facilitated by micro-organisms, by the ferric/ferrous iron couple, or proceeds directly at the mineral surface. In an operating heap oxygen has to transfer from air in the interstitial spaces between rocks into the aqueous phase where it taken up by micro-organisms or reacts with ferrous iron species directly. Oxygen gas–liquid mass transfer is a kinetic process, the rate of which is determined by a number of factors, primarily temperature, gas and liquid composition and gas–liquid interfacial area. The overall rate of leaching in a heap bioleach process is determined by the rates of a large number of sub-processes, with the slowest being rate limiting ( The solubility of oxygen in aqueous solution has been well studied, and thermodynamic correlations are available in the literature (for example A good estimate of the rate of oxidation can be made from an analysis of previous column leach data ( Here this approach is extended to recognize that the total rate of electron transfer within a column over a certain period of time must correlate with the rate of oxygen uptake into solution over the same period (assuming there is no other electron sink in the system). This can in turn be used to determine the oxygen mass transfer coefficient for a given system. The approach of correlating oxygen consumption with heat generation is commonly applied in the analysis of bioprocesses ( Oxygen gas–liquid mass transfer is usually described by Newton’s law of cooling: Given a rate of total oxidation, The rate of oxygen consumption per unit volume heap is related back to the rate of transfer into the solution by determining the liquid volume fraction within the heap:  For aqueous solutions, It is also critical to consider the effect of humidity in a column (or heap) situation. Due to the low gas velocities, passing air is likely to become saturated with water vapour at the given temperature. At saturation the partial pressure of water vapour in the gas phase corresponds to the water vapour pressure at that temperature. This can be calculated as follows ( The presence of water vapour effectively depresses the partial pressure of oxygen in the gas phase: Thus the solubility of oxygen in the aqueous phase in a heap system is further depressed by water vapour at elevated temperatures.  It is interesting to note in this context that the oxygen solubility of a highly saline process solution ( Two sets of experimental data of columns run under Geocoat™ conditions were evaluated in terms of the total oxidation over time under leach ( Experiments with an Australian chalcopyrite concentrate (26.8% Cu, 27.5% Fe, 28.8% S) were conducted ( When plotting the total oxidation data against time ( Data points belonging to the linear phase of the curve have been correlated by linear regression to give an oxidation function with time, as shown in Experiments conducted with an Australian Cu–Au concentrate (7.4% Cu, 20.7% Fe, 22.7% S) have been partially reported by As can be seen, there is some degree of spread the longer the experiment continues (shaded area). Data points have been correlated by linear regression to determine the rate of oxidation, which ranges from 0.72 (mol The liquid hold-up in this experiment has also been estimated to be around 0.8 The determination of  It is now of interest to develop a simple model for the functional relationship between Assuming that the temperature relationship of The data shows almost perfectly linear behaviour, indicating that the non-linear effects of oxygen solubility (Eq. An alternative route to the determination of oxygen mass transfer in heap systems is to measure the rate of oxygen removal from the gas phase given a predictable rate of oxygen consumption in the liquid phase. The reaction of sodium sulphite with dissolved oxygen in the presence of a dissolved cobalt as catalyst ( The intrinsic rate constant To measure the rate of oxygen adsorption in packed beds, tests were conducted in short 10 The columns were heated from the outside, and hermetically sealed to ensure no gas can enter or exist through channels other than the gas ports. The columns were continuously rinsed with a 30 All experiments were carried out in triplicate. Average gas flow rates in and out were determined for each temperature and an average reading of the gas-analyser was used to determine the oxygen concentration in the off-gas at each temperature. This information was then used to calculate the volumetric rate of oxygen consumption at each temperature. Thus the experimental results support the findings from the leach studies, that leaching progresses at a more or less constant rate, largely independent of temperature ( Before determining values of The rate of oxygen transfer into the film is determined by the oxygen concentration gradient at the gas–liquid interface: This ratio can be obtained from a theoretical analysis of diffusion–reaction through a liquid film: The linear mass transport-reaction equation of a small concentration of a dissolved species diffusing through a solvent and reacting according to first order kinetics can be described as follows: Above equation is easily solved numerically by discretising as follows and solving by continuous substitution: Eq. Values chosen for the reaction constant were 0.01 The results are represented in  For the rapidly reacting system ( The results are reflected in The volumetric oxygen adsorption rates for the different column experiments shown in As can be seen, the results are remarkably close to those obtained from the experimental observations in the Geocoat™ studies (42.6 The present study has shown, through both experiment and theoretical evaluation, that gas–liquid mass transfer of oxygen in heap leach scenarios is remarkably constant between different systems and is not a significant function of temperature in the range 22–68 The results indicate that heap bio-leaching as a process is determined by the rate of gas–liquid mass transfer of oxygen into solution in all the cases studied, which cover different materials, temperatures and microbial consortia. While operating heaps at low temperatures may be limited even more by slow mineral kinetics, thermophilic heap bio-leaching certainly cannot progress any faster than the rate of oxygen gas–liquid mass transfer allows, even though it may be the preferred route for chalcopyrite leaching. Operating heaps at high altitude and in highly saline solutions further limit the rate of oxygen mass transfer and hence the overall rate of metal recovery. This work was conducted in the context of the AMIRA P768A project and the author gratefully acknowledges their sponsorship. The author would also like to acknowledge the contributions to the experimental portion of this work made by Emmanuel Ngoma, Thierry Kamunga Kazadi and Tracy Reddy. Geocoat is a trade mark process of GeoBiotics LLC of Lakewood, CO, USA.