An analytical method in propolis was developed and validated for the determination of four tetracyclines (TCs) by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for the first time. After extraction by ultrasound, the extracting solution was subjected to Oasis HLB and weak cation-exchange cartridge to remove water-soluble and fat-soluble flavonoids, aromatic acids, terpenoid compounds, wax, and pollen debris. The calibration curves of fortified samples showed acceptable linear response (R
                     2
                     >0.99) through a range of 100–5000ngg−1 in 20 replicates of six concentrations and the analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed to validate the regression data. The limit of quantification of four TCs were 100 and 150ngg−1, respectively. The recoveries of the four TCs for propolis samples spiked with 100–500ngg−1 were in the range of 61.9–88.5% and the RSDs were between 4.80% and 13.2%. Traces of tetracycline were found in two out of 30 analysed real samples.Propolis (bee glue) is a chemically complex resinous bee product that honeybees collect from leaf buds and exudates of plants of various plants. The honeybee uses it to strengthen the borders of combs as the building material; what is more, it is regarded as the “chemical weapon” of bees against pathogen microorganisms ( Tetracyclines (TCs) are broad-spectrum antibiotics which show activity against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, including the species In the United States, the maximum residue limits (MRLs) of tetracycline for all food producing species ranged from 2 to 12 The purpose of this study was to develop an effective extraction and clean-up procedure for simultaneous determination of four TCs residues in propolis. The extraction and clean-up conditions were investigated and optimised by using ultrasonic-assisted extraction and two-step SPE methods. Ultrasound can be considered a useful alternative for solid sample pretreatment because the energy imparted facilitates and accelerates some steps, such as dissolution, fusion, and leaching, among others ( Methanol, ethyl acetate and acetonitrile were HPLC grade and were purchased from Baker (Deventer, Netherland). Oxalic acid, citric acid, disodium hydrogen phosphate (Na The Waters HPLC system consisted of a 600E pump, a tunable absorbance ultraviolet detector operated at wavelength of 350 About 30 raw propolis samples were provided by beekeeper or bee product Corporation of different regions of China. The propolis powders were obtained after comminution and filtration (40 meshes) and kept at 4 Aliquots of powder (2.0 Aliquots of powder (2.0 The supernatant was poured into and flowed through the Oasis HLB cartridge equipped with reservoir with gravity, preconditioned sequentially with 5 The ethyl acetate eluate was transferred into a carboxylic acid cartridge, previously conditioned 5 For tetracyclines, there are two maximum absorption wavelengths at 275 and 350 The columns including Symmetry C18, Novapak C18, μBondpak C18 and Agilent ZORBAX SB-C18 were tried to separate four TCs. After many trials, TCs can be separate by using μBondpak C18 and Agilent ZORBAX SB-C18 column. But, peak tailings and wide peak of OTC, TC, CTC and DC occurred with μBondpak C18 column. In order to optimise the separation and get better signal of peaks, Agilent ZORBAX SB-C18 was tested and symmetrical and sharp peaks without tailings or overlaps were obtained by using it. The TCs with metal ions and adsorb on the silanol group is easy to form chelate complexes in a reversed-phase column because of the presence of two ketone groups, so that TCs are apt to appear as tailing peaks ( In order to obtain optimal extraction efficiency, extraction solvents and extraction time were investigated. Various solvents including methanol, acetonitrile, ethyl acetate and Na Shake extraction is widely used although its disadvantages include time consumption and low recovery. In this work, the poor recoveries (<30%) were sourced by using shake extraction ( C18, Oasis HLB and carboxylic acid disposable cartridges were tested for the clean-up of propolis samples. However, no success was obtained for single one of them because of the interference of impurities and extraneous substances. The poor recoveries, repeatability and reproducibility were obtained by the clean-up of generic C18. The Oasis HLB, made of lipophilic and hydrophilic copolymer with a balanced ratio of two monomers, was chosen for the clean-up of propolis sample. TCs can be retained on this polymer by both polar and non-polar interactions, which allow better recoveries. The recoveries obtained for OTC, TC, CTC and DC exceeded to 120% and more impurities were found, which mean that only utilisation of Oasis HLB failed to effectively purify the impurity of propolis, so an additional solid phase extraction (SPE) clean-up step was then added ( The chromatographic interference from endogenous compounds was assessed by comparing chromatograms of blank propolis and propolis spiked with four TCs. An ultraviolet detector was used to check for the presence of coeluting peaks of four TCs. Calibration curves were obtained separately by plotting the peak area of four TCs to the spiked TCs theoretical concentrations in blank propolis on the same day ( Limit of quantification, which is the minimum concentration of TCs that can be quantitatively determined with a peak area to base line ratio of at least 10:1. The LOQ was 100 and 150 In order to assess the intra- and inter-day precision and accuracy of the assay, propolis samples at low, medium and high concentrations were prepared as described above. The intra-day precision of the assay was assessed by calculating the coefficients of variation (CV) for the analysis of propolis samples in quintuplicate; and inter-day precision was determined by the analysis of propolis samples on four consecutive days. Accuracy was calculated by comparing the averaged measurements and the nominal values ( Absolute recoveries of four TCs were evaluated by spiked blank propolis samples at three concentrations from 100 to 500 The stability studies evaluate the stability of the trace amount of TCs residue of propolis and the stability of aqueous standard solutions was also evaluated. The solutions were analysed every two weeks and were compared with freshly prepared standards (200 The samples reconstituted with mobile phase were found to be unstable for over 24 The method was applied to real propolis samples provided by some beekeepers and supermarkets. In two out of 30 analysed samples, traces of tetracyclines were found and treatment to control AFB or EFB with TCs was substantiated by the beekeeper. Result indicated that the residue concentrations in propolis were 108 In this paper, an efficient method for simultaneous determination of four TCs residue in propolis, using HPLC-UV on the basis of ultrasonic-assisted extraction and two-step solid phase extraction, has been developed for the first time. Good recoveries (61.9–88.5%) and RSDs (<15%) were obtained, with limits of quantification, ranging from 100 to 150