Potentiometric titration measurements as well as rheological measurements of talc aqueous suspensions indicate that the behavior of the New York talc particles is consistent with the presence of a negative charge on their basal planes. The possibility of the presence of a negative electrical charge on the basal planes of talc particles is analyzed in this paper. Samples of New York talc were studied using electron microprobe analysis and dehydration techniques and the exact chemical formula of New York talc was determined. It was found that there exists a deficiency of protons in the tetrahedral layers of talc, resulting from substitution of Si4+ ions with Al3+ and Ti3+ ions. The comparison of the level of substitution of Si4+ ions with ions of a lower valency was found to be of a similar order of magnitude as that found in other talc deposits. This strongly points to the presence of a negative charge on the talc basal planes.Talc is a magnesium-rich phylosilicate mineral that occurs as a gangue component in many base metal sulfide ore deposits around the world. These ores are generally beneficiated by flotation. Due to its natural floatability, talc readily enters the flotation concentrate, reducing its grade. Talc is a layered silicate mineral that consists of octahedral magnesium hydroxide structures sandwiched between sheets of silicon–oxygen tetrahedra. The layered talc sheets are held together by weak van der Waals forces. As a result, talc is an anisotropic mineral and the particles exhibit distinct edges and basal planes. In some cases, small amounts of titanium or aluminum can substitute for silicon in the tetrahedral layer, while calcium may substitute for magnesium in the octahedral brucite layer It is commonly stated in many publications that the tetrahedral layers are fully charge compensated, thus rendering the basal planes of talc free of electrical charge. On the other hand, talc edges are considered to possess a negative charge which results from breaking ionic and covalent bonds in the brucite layer The surface charge of talc particles is commonly estimated by means of electrophoretic zeta potential measurements, with the isoelectric point of talc commonly estimated at pH ≈ 2.5 The surface charge distribution of talc was also studied using the floatability of talc as a function of pH. Some studies showed that the recovery of talc by flotation was completely independent of pH These discrepancies can be explained by the fact that electrophoretic mobility techniques are inherently inappropriate for the determination of the isoelectric point of anisotropic minerals (especially anisotropic plate-like particles). The zeta potential measurements make use of Smoluchowki's equation An attempt to measure the isoelectric points of talc basal planes and edges, respectively, was made by Nalaskowski et al. using a streaming potential technique All of the above places the base assumptions regarding the surface charge distribution of talc (neutral basal planes and highly negative edges) into question. A study by Okuda et al. Kaolinite is a silicate mineral that belongs to the same family of clay minerals as talc. Due to its wide use in the ceramics industry, the surface properties of kaolinite have been studied extensively for over 30 years. Unlike symmetric 2:1 sheet minerals such as montmorillonite and talc, kaolinite has two types of basal planes, the tetrahedral Si–O plane and the octahedral Al–OH plane The octahedral basal plane of kaolinite, as well as its edges, carries a charge that depends on solution pH. The charge arises from the presence of amphoteric OH groups on the mineral surface, exposed to the aqueous medium and therefore amenable to H Similar to talc, the tetrahedral basal plane of kaolinite was originally considered completely neutral. However it was later shown to carry a permanent negative charge due to isomorphic substitution of Si The presence of a negative charge on one of the planes of kaolinite causes it to behave differently from isotropic minerals—the minerals that have a uniform surface charge distribution. In the case of isotropic minerals, the magnitude of the charge on the mineral surface can be estimated from the electrophoretic mobility (zeta potential) measurements. In the absence of specifically adsorbing ions, the electrophoretic isoelectric point of the mineral corresponds directly to its point of zero charge However, if the mineral is anisotropic and plate-like (as is the case of kaolinite), the situation becomes more complex and the isoelectric point cannot be accurately determined using zeta potential measurements, due to the hydrodynamic complexities described earlier. This phenomenon is well illustrated by a clear disparity between the apparent isoelectric point of kaolinite and its point of zero charge obtained by potentiometric titration. The electrophoretic isoelectric point of kaolinite lies at pH The behavior of kaolinite contrasts with that of zircon. Zircon is an isotropic mineral with a uniform tetragonal structure The aim of this paper is to examine the possibility that the basal planes of the New York talc carry a negative charge by evaluating the extent of substitution of Si New York talc, obtained from Wards Minerals, was used in the test work. The talc was dry-ground in a titanium ring mill to yield a P The chemical composition of talc was determined by mineral analysis of polished thin sections of New York talc with a Jeol Superprobe JXA8100, hosted by the Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Cape Town. The operating parameters used were 15 kV accelerating voltage and 20 nA beam current with 10 s peak and 5 s background counting time. The beam size was between 5 and 10 μm. The instrument was calibrated against external mineral standards. The amount of crystalline water contained within the talc samples was determined by dehydration. Several 2.00-g talc samples were predried in an oven overnight at 100 °C in order to remove any environmental moisture. The samples were then roasted in a furnace at 950 °C, over a period of 48 h. The amount of removed crystalline water was calculated by the difference in the mass of the talc samples before and after roasting. The point of zero charge of talc was determined using the Roberts–Mular titration method Talc was placed in The measurements were performed in a shear rate controlling regime, with the shear rate ranging between 30 and 200 s In order to determine whether or not the basal planes of talc carry a negative charge, the extent of the substitution of silicon ions in the Si–O tetrahedra with ions of a lower valency needs to be evaluated. This requires the exact crystalline formula of the used talc. It has been determined using electron microprobe analysis. Microprobe analysis works by focusing a beam of accelerated electrons onto the polished mineral surface. The result is the emission of X-rays with a wave length specific to every individual element (with the exception of hydrogen, helium, and lithium). Microprobe analysis was performed on a polished thin section of New York talc, with the results presented in The results also show that the total weight fraction of the sample does not add up to 100%. This is due to the fact that microprobe analysis is unable to detect hydrogen ions and is therefore unable to estimate the amount of water present in the crystal lattice. By difference, the talc sample should contain The actual amount of water contained within New York talc was experimentally measured by dehydrating the talc samples in a furnace at 950 °C for 48 h. The proportion of crystalline water was found to be From the available microprobe and dehydration data, the exact chemical formula of the nonideal sample of New York talc can be calculated. The chemical formula of talc was determined by balancing the cations present in the sample (as detected by the microprobe) with the number of oxygen anions present in the crystal lattice. This calculation is a standard geological technique employed to characterize minerals. The procedure is described in detail by Deer et al. According to the ideal chemical formula of New York talc (Mg By comparing the calculated values to the ideal values, the degree of substitution taking place within every layer can be evaluated. The values for the ideal number of cations compared to the measured number of cations in the tetrahedral and octahedral layers of New York talc are summeriest in  The results also show that the amount of substitution is very small, only The calculated degree of substitution in talc tetrahedral layers is also of a similar order of magnitude to that found in kaolinite as demonstrated in The microprobe analysis of New York talc has verified that the basal planes of talc do not consist of fully compensated Si–O tetrahedra, but contain impurities that render talc basal planes slightly negative. However, it is still necessary to test whether or not the presence of a small negative charge on the talc basal planes is sufficient to significantly alter the behavior of talc particles and to make it deviate from the expected behavior of a mineral that carries no charge on its basal planes. It has already been stated that the electrophoretic isoelectric point for talc has been measured at a pH of 2.5. In order to see whether or not this value corresponds to the point of zero charge of the mineral, a potentiometric titration has been performed using the Roberts–Mular method The results reveal that the point of zero charge of talc falls on pH It also indicates that the electrophoretic measurements could be further biased by the presence of oppositely charged particle planes which introduce an attractive force toward both the anode and the cathode of the electrophoretic cell. Therefore, the electrophoretic isoelectric point should not be used as an adequate representation of the true isoelectric point of anisotropic minerals and must be referred to as an “apparent” isoelectric point. The effect of the presence of the negative charge on the talc basal planes can be further tested by measuring the yield stress of talc suspensions as a function of pH and evaluating the point at which the suspension of talc undergoes maximum coagulation. The results are shown in The results demonstrate that the point of maximum Casson yield stress (and hence the point of maximum coagulation) falls on pH Based on the observations made in this paper, as well as the observations of Okuda et al. A schematic representation of the proposed surface charge distribution of talc is shown in The detailed microprobe analysis of the New York talc samples showed that the talc basal planes do not consist of fully compensated Si–O tetrahedra. Some of the silicon ions are randomly substituted by aluminum and titanium ions, causing a proton deficiency in outer tetrahedral layers, which results in the presence of a negative charge on talc basal planes. The degree of substitution of silicon ions was relatively small ( Although a number of impurities were detected in the tested talc samples, New York talc is a relatively pure mineral and its level of substitution of silicon ions is low compared to that reported in various other talc deposits. There is therefore no reason to believe that the presence of a negative charge on basal planes and the resultant suspension behavior are atypical from talc minerals from other sources.