The spherical indentation technique has been successfully implemented for inducing controlled damage, under both monotonic and cyclic loading conditions, in three microstructurally different polycrystalline diamond (PCD) grades. Damage evolution under increasing applied load and/or number of cycles has been assessed, and the attained results point out the important role of microstructure on nature, aspect and evolution of damage in these materials. At the microscopic level, transgranular fracture of diamond particles and crack propagation through the binder matrix are found to be the predominant crack paths for damage induced under contact loads in all the cases.Through the years, one of the main objectives of research concerned with structural ceramics has relied on increasing reliability through creation of microstructures that impart sufficient fracture resistance so that strength becomes insensitive to the size of flaws (e.g. ref. In order to assess the influence of microstructure on damage-strength correlation for brittle materials, Lawn and co-workers have systematically and extensively shown that Hertzian testing is a very effective tool for introducing “controlled” damage (e.g. refs. Three microstructurally different experimental PCD grades were supplied by Element Six, and are here referred to as PCD04S, PCD10B and PCD20S. Specimens were mining tool bits (16 Contact damage on the PCDs was introduced by means of spherical indentation tests under both monotonic and cyclic loading conditions. They were performed in a servohydraulic universal testing machine (INSTRON model 8511). Regarding monotonic loading, PCD specimens were indented at prescribed levels, using hardmetal indenters with different diameters, 2.5 and 5.0 Cyclic contact tests were carried out using the 5 The imprints produced on the specimen surfaces from both monotonic and cyclic tests were optically evaluated with a laser scanning confocal microscope (LSCM). Concerning optical inspection of damage, Nomarski interference contrast microscopy (NICM) was found to be especially suitable for detecting cracks around imprints. Contact damaged specimens were also examined by FE-SEM, especially for the observation of crack–microstructure interaction. Finally, focused ion beam (FIB) was performed in order to evaluate the subsurface of the ring cracks generated by spherical indentation. FIB technique allowed obtaining polished, micrometric subsurface cross-sections, transversal to ring cracks.  Damage evolution induced by spherical indentation using the 5 Nevertheless, two observations may be highlighted. First, damage emergence seems to be delayed for the finest grade as compared to the other two, i.e. PCD04S requires a higher applied load level for initial cracking. It shows a higher resistance against crack nucleation as compared to PCD10B and PCD20S. Second, qualitative differences associated with neatness and sharpness of damage features are even more evident by using the 5 Contact fatigue tests are usually performed aiming to evaluate the susceptibility of the material under consideration to premature appearance or evolution of damage as either applied cyclic stress (for a given number of cycles) or number of cycles (for a given applied stress) increases. Within this context and according to the results presented in the previous section two load levels: a low one (400 Representative images of imprints resulting from spherical indentation at applied loads of 400 An extensive FE-SEM study was conducted on cracked regions for all the grades and testing conditions. Although all possible fracture paths were evidenced in almost all the cases, transgranular cracking of diamond particles and crack propagation through the matrix binder were clearly predominant. Nevertheless, prominence and specific aspect of each of them vary depending on PCD microstructure and loading mode. One dominant fracture path was the The other dominant fracture path was the Attempting to rationalize any microstructural effects, it seems clear that the PCD10B grade exhibits a “thicker” mean free path; thus, crack–microstructure interactions regarding toughening effects are somehow more evident in this material. However, the fact that binder phase in this grade is indeed a PCD-like material by itself implies an additional complexity on characterizing key two-phase microstructural parameters such as mean free path of binder or diamond contiguity. This may also be critical for understanding any damage tolerance behavior associated with cyclic loading, as it is known that toughening agents are also responsible for fatigue susceptibility that the composite material may exhibit. A third fracture path observed during the FE-SEM examination corresponded to FIB evaluation offers the advantage of visualizing a microscopic cross-section at a desired location in a surface. This subsurface inspection was carried out to study the induced contact damage around the indentation imprint. A systematic study of the damage induced by means of spherical indentation, under both monotonic and cyclic loading conditions, has been conducted in three microstructurally different PCD grades. From the results attained, it may be concluded that spherical indentation techniques, well-established methodologies for evaluating damage effects on advanced ceramics and cemented carbides, may be successfully implemented for studying PCD composite materials. Such statement is supported by the facts that: controlled damage may be induced under both monotonic and cyclic loading, damage evolution under increasing applied load or number of cycles is discerned, and microstructure is shown to play an important role on damage nature, aspect and evolution. Nevertheless, and within the context of the PCD grades studied, a simple examination based on induced surface damage does not allow quantification of microstructural effects regarding crack nucleation and propagation resistance. The fact that cracking is the dominant damage feature for the three PCD grades implies that damage scenario is closer to that found in brittle homogeneous materials. From the viewpoint of damage micromechanisms, extensive and detailed LSCM and FE-SEM inspection points out a complex and synergic damage–microstructure interaction. Transgranular fracture of diamond particles and crack propagation through the binder matrix are the predominant crack paths for damage induced under contact loads. In this regard, toughening role played by the Co-base matrix was evidenced for all the materials studied. A deeper understanding of microstructural effects on induced damage requires a more accurate and suitable microstructural characterization on the basis of key two-phase parameters as well as effective characterization of subsurface damage. Concerning the latter, FIB evaluation has shown that induced damage can be large enough to become a critical defect. Accordingly, evaluation of residual strength of indented specimens is proposed as an interesting approach for quantifying and rationalizing damage tolerance behavior for PCD materials. Research work was conducted within a cooperative effort between Element Six and Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. Authors are grateful to Dr. T. Trifonov for his help in performing the FIB studies. Finally, support received from the