Many industrial plants have railway lines that must support low-speed heavy haul freight traffic. This type of special haulage, such as pig iron torpedo ladles or heavy cisterns, may cause substantial settlement of the track foundations and require suitable sleeper and ballast design that allows these elements to uniformly transmit axle loads to the ground.
                  In this study, we develop a failure analysis of a railway track used for transporting heavy haul industrial freight. The aim of the study is to describe the method with which this type of failure should be analyzed. We develop a specific case, establishing the causes of failure and offering guidelines for improving the design and upkeep the sleepers and ballast on which the tracks are laid. The ultimate aim is to offer guidance to the forensic engineer on the tests and variables to analyze with regard to the failure of railway track foundations.Designs for improved railroad track structure systems will be increasingly needed to ensure system safety, reliability and profitability as the railroads strive to compete with other means of transport for the movement of freight and passengers. Design improvements will focus primarily on accommodating increased vehicle weights, faster operating speeds, and reduced track maintenance cycles. On the other hand, due to changes in the railway industry, new types of vehicles are being introduced and higher operating speeds and axle loads are being proposed The increase in transport capacity has been stimulated by the growing industrial need for long-distance freight conveyance. The fact that freight transportation requires considerably heavier trains than passenger transportation can be illustrated by comparing the static axle load. The static axle load, which reflects the gravity loading of the train, normally does not exceed 170 All these loads are ultimately transmitted to the ground through the system formed by the rail, sleepers and ballast. Inappropriate design of the railway track may thus be best appreciated in these elements Therefore, greater control over the materials and design of railway track foundations is needed. In recent years, a great deal of research has gone into studying high-speed track failure as well as the design of lines that must support heavy hauls This paper reports on the methods that have been employed in a project to analyze the causes of damage resulting from track settlement. We start out from the characteristics of a heavy haul railway track in which traditional wooden sleepers have been substituted by new, pre-stressed concrete sleepers. After a short period of activity, the sleepers on this track presented a high degree of damage, with numerous fissures and cracks. We study the effects of the ballast and the concrete sleeper with different ground characteristics. The resulting values are not intended to be absolute indicators of damage but can be used in a comparative way to assess the effects of different concrete sleeper and ballast designs. Many design improvements have almost invariably been achieved by starting out from failure analysis, subsequently presenting alternatives that reduce or completely remove said failure or its underlying causes. Hence the interest in studying failure using a methodology that allows the forensic engineer to obtain detailed knowledge of all the factors that trigger it, above all when said failure may give rise to important risks to users, as is the case of railway transport. We shall thus focus our study on the failure analysis of the concrete sleepers forming part of railway track foundations. We shall first study the materials that make up each element of the track foundations (rail, sleepers, ballast and substructure) to then describe the detected failure. Finally, we shall determine the causes that have triggered this failure. Our study case corresponds to 2 The railway track is made up of rail, sleepers, ballast, subballast, geotextile and the underlying ground (see The track has a layer of ballast that is a mixture of quartzite materials of variable thickness, though always greater than 50 The ballast must transmit the axle load on the sleepers to the subgrade in the most uniform way possible. Pre-stressed concrete sleepers are employed on this railway line. These are of the DW-60 type with a space of 600 Standard UIC-60 rail (International Union of Railways) was used on the track. The separation between rails corresponds to the Iberian gauge of 1668 It should be noted that these tracks support two types of freight that may be clearly differentiated by their load and their speed of transit. With special traffic (torpedoes, cisterns, etc.), the track must support high axle loads (370 The rolling stock that usually travels on the line is made up of two 1050 CV General Electric U10B DIESEL locomotives , each weighing 64 As the topology of sleeper failure was observed to be directly related to torpedo wagon traffic, our study shall focus on this type of wagon. The typical configuration of one of these convoys is given in Having described the fundamental features of the railway track and of the rolling stock, we shall now describe the failure detected in this track. Torpedo wagon traffic was initially carried out on track consisting of wooden sleepers that were periodically removed in accordance with track maintenance cycles. When these sleepers were substituted by concrete ones, fracture failure of the sleepers was detected. In order to monitor this failure, visual examination of the state of the sleepers was carried out on two different occasions (October 2003 and February 2004). The track was divided into seven sections, obtaining the percentages of cracked sleepers in each section shown in As can be seen, the increase in the number of sleepers affected by cracking over a short period of time is quite considerable, thus substantially conditioning the feasibility and safety of this railway line. Although an increase in the degree of cracking is barely appreciable in sections T2, T5, T6 and T7, it is so in the rest, especially in sections T3 and T4. It should be noted that the broken sleepers continue to work despite being cracked, and must only be replaced when the cracks grow until becoming a clear fracture. The geometry of the cracks may be seen in Apart from the fractured sleepers, extrusion of the baseplates was observed at some points, these being forced out of their position little by little. In this initial visual inspection of the track, it was observed that there is no direct relation between the characteristics of the subgrade and the presence of cracked sleepers. Failure appears both in areas whose subgrade is made up of bedrock, as well as in areas of the subgrade formed by repeated refilling with material. The subgrade was therefore ruled out as a determinant cause of sleeper failure, arriving at the apparent hypothesis that failure of the sleepers may have two causes: The ballast does not uniformly transmit the load to the ground, resulting in failure of the sleepers. If the ballast performs correctly, the sleepers are not designed to support such heavy loads, either due to defects in the concrete or as a result of their deficient prestressing. The goal of this study is to analyze which of these two causes of failure is the most likely, with the aim of providing the forensic engineer with the necessary basis for judgment so as to hence correct such failure. To do so, the following work was carried out. Visual inspection of and identification tests on the materials. Analysis of the subgrade and of the ballast via Analysis of the sleepers, studying the concrete and prestressing steel of which they are made. Instrumentation and measurement of the displacements suffered by the sleepers and of the pressures transmitted to the ballast during the passing of the torpedo wagons. Analysis of the displacements and stresses in the track by means of 3D finite-difference modelling, which enables its behaviour to be ascertained under different loads and characteristics of the ballast and of the subgrade. The introduction carried out in this section has allowed us to present an initial description of the elements affected by the failure. In the following sections, we shall present the data supplied by laboratory and We shall now describe the laboratory and Four types of tests were employed to characterize the subgrade: identification tests, Proctor tests (Standard Proctor Test), CBR tests (California Bearing Ratio), and Identification tests allow the ground forming the subgrade to be classified according to its different properties: physical, chemical and status (which depend on external factors, such as moisture). In the present case, the following parameters were determined on the samples obtained from the subgrade: Granulometric analysis by sieving. Atterberg limits. Presence of sulphates. Carbonate content. Organic matter content. Density of solid particles.  The results obtained from a total of eight samples are shown in The granulometric curves of the subgrade materials were likewise determined by calculating the percentages of gravel, sand and fines (clay and silt). The Atterberg limits of the fines of the analyzed materials were obtained in accordance with the standard ASTM D 4318 Organic matter is present at around 2.1%, with a maximum value of 3.9% and a minimum of 1.6%. There is evident contamination of the subgrade due to spillage of the coal from the wagons on many sections of the track. The analyzed ground may be classified using the USCS (unified soil classification system) ASTM D 2487-83 Tests were performed to estimate the compaction of the subgrade employing the Proctor test ASTM D 1557 The values of optimum moisture content varied between 33.1% and 24.1%, the mean optimum moisture content being 24.1%. Maximum density reached its highest value at 18.4 The dynamic penetration test carried out was of the Borros type These tests must be interpreted with caution. As they consisted of penetration tests conducted with a small spike, it is possible that very high strength values were obtained at certain points, and even rebound, due to the presence of boulders or stones. Ballast is the coarse grain arid into which the sleepers fit. The aim of ballast is to provide a stable drainage base in order to maintain the alignment of the track with minimum maintenance. It must dampen the loads transmitted to the subgrade and must elastically absorb the deformations induced by the sleepers. The sleepers rest on the points of the angular fragments of ballast, which break or degrade depending on the applied load. The capacity of the ballast to support these loads depends on its thickness, its purpose being to bear the intermittent loads produced by railway traffic. Both the dynamic effects of the load and high values of the said load are damaging if the line is used to transport special heavy haul freight. The standards N.R.V. 3-4-0.0. The ballast on the track under study comprises of an average thickness of granular materials, more or less cubic in shape, with a particle size initially ranging between 25 and 50 On the track under study, A-type ballast Laboratory tests were used in its characterization to determine the granulometric curve of the ballast, its wear resistance, freeze resistance and the ballast coefficient via Although recently laid ballast for the track complies with the technical specifications established by RENFE Standard A  In view of the above findings, it was concluded that the ballast had degraded to such a extent on the track that neither its granulometry nor its status were in keeping with the desirable characteristics of this type of foundation. The wear resistance test (Los Angeles test Product specification PRV 3-4-0-0 accepts Los Angeles coefficient values lower than 19% as valid in quartzite ballast, and lower than 22% in limestone ballast. All the analyzed ballast samples present wear within the limits required by the standard with values of below 19%, although these values are very close to the limit, varying between 15.8% and 18.8%. The aim of the standard UNE-EN 1367-5 Load plate tests were conducted on the ballast situated under the sleepers with the aim of estimating the ballast coefficient. For these tests, load plates were employed below both fractured and stable sleepers, as well as at different positions on these (A-North, B-Centre and C-South), obtaining the values shown in The obtained values of the ballast coefficient are characterized by their heterogeneity, both within and between sleepers. The tests carried out in the areas in which there are a substantial number of fractured sleepers constitute an illustrative example.  Two phenomena are observed in the load plate tests of the fractured sleepers: In sleeper E1, great variability between the ballast coefficient of one end of the sleeper and the other, passing from 583 to 13 In sleeper E2, the values of the ballast coefficient are very low, indicating a high degree of deformability, which is also accompanied by substantial residual settlement. This would explain the tensile cracks that appear in the Centre of the sleepers, since it is this central segment that is subject to notable bending stress. However, it is necessary to study whether the concrete and the tendons of the pre-stressed sleepers can support such settlement of the ballast. We shall carry out this study in the next section. Below we discuss the different tests aimed at obtaining the strength properties of the sleepers and at verifying whether they comply with the respective technical requirements UNE-EN 13230-2 The tests performed to determine the strength properties of the concrete of which the sleepers are made were:    On the basis of these results, the conclusion was reached that the sleeper concrete complies with the technical requirements established by the standard UNE-EN 13230-2 First, the strength of the steel of the pre-stressed tendons was studied. Tests were performed on several samples of steel, obtaining tensile strength values of between 1645.2 On the other hand, the tensile stress to which the tendons of the sleepers are subjected due to prestressing was measured by means of an extensometric test.  Once the extensometric strips had been placed in position, the steel tendons were cut one at a time (using a circular saw), thus removing the stress to which they are subjected due to prestressing (see Taking this displacement into account in addition to the value of the previously determined elastic modulus, it was found that the prestressing achieves values of 961.7 All the aforementioned tests and analyzes focussed on the sleepers. However, it is necessary to study how these elements perform jointly The railway track was accordingly instrumented in order to obtain the vertical displacements and pressures transmitted by the sleepers to the ballast. These measurements were carried out using continuous register sensors while the convoys circulated on the track. The area chosen for instrumentation consisted of 10 adjacent sleepers, the majority of which presented incipient fissures and cracks, although none had yet fractured completely. Due to the interest of this test,  Once these sleepers had been chosen, three displacement sensors were placed on each sleeper to measure its settlement (one under each rail and another in the central segment). Three hydraulic stress cells were also installed on sleeper 6 (one under each rail and the other in the central segment).  The displacement sensor is a linear resistance sensor with a standard resistance range of 5 The stress cell consists of a pressure pad connected to the transducer via a hydraulic line. The internal cavity between the two steel plates of the pressure pad and the hydraulic line are filled in the laboratory with special oil that has been de-aired under high vacuum so as to obtain minimum oil compressibility. The rigidity of the cell is even assured by the transducer, which has a ceramic diaphragm with negligible volume displacement in comparison with the cell cavity. Its measuring range is 0–20  Maximum settlements are produced when the torpedo wagon wheel bogies pass over the sleeper, those of the South rail being much greater than those of the North rail. This is due to the fact that the ballast coefficients of the South segment are much lower. A bending effect is also noticed in the sleepers that results in a relative swelling of their Central segment with respect to the ends, although the general movement is decreasing. On the other hand, it is worth noting that negative subsidence is produced in the North and Centre segments when the locomotive passes over the sleeper as a result of the high subsidence produced by the passing of the first torpedo.  The increases in pressure due to the wheel assemblies can be perfectly distinguished, and even the different wheels in each assembly can be distinguished. This finding is interesting, since it allows us to verify that the transmission of loads is not perfect, as the wheels are either not balanced or at a different height. Measurements were also taken in sleepers 6 and 7 of the horizontal unit deformations that are produced with the passing of the convoy in order to verify whether they were large enough to produce fracture of the concrete. To do so, three extensometric gauges were bonded to each sleeper as shown in The unit deformation was registered during the passing of the locomotive and of the first bogey composed of three wheels of the convoy torpedo, but from that moment on the extensometric gauges broke and it was not possible to continue registering the produced deformations. It can be observed that the greatest microdeformations were obtained in the Centre segment of the sleeper, reaching values of 150 This value of 150 The purpose of the finite-difference numerical modelling employed in this study was to integrate all the available information obtained from laboratory trials, The field data, and especially that obtained from the load plates, served to define the properties of the materials (ballast and subgrade) to be used as input for the numerical model. The properties of the sleepers and of the steel of the rail were obtained from both laboratory and field tests. The track instrumentation results (measurement of displacements and pressures on the ballast) served to calibrate the models and to test their goodness-of-fit. Due to the complexity of the numerical models, a simplification of the model was carried out. First, a study of only 1 sleeper was performed (see The 3D modelling of the rail–sleeper–ballast–subgrade system for both the 1-sleeper model and the 10-sleeper model was performed with the aid of the ALMEC computer program (the name is a Spanish acronym for Lagrangian analysis of continuous media). This software, belonging to the set of computer programs based on the finite difference method, was developed by the Ground Engineering Group at the University of Oviedo. Starting out from the aforementioned geometric model, the ALMEC program generates discrete elements by means of an irregular hexahedral mesh. A mesh of nodes and areas is thus formed to which scalar and vectorial magnitudes are applied that define the behaviour of the model, i.e. strength and deformation properties and initial stress state. The program then initiates an iterative calculation process on each element, recalculating the displacements in each step as a function of deformations and stresses until equilibrium is reached. We shall next analyze the peculiarities of the calculation mesh, the properties of the materials under study and the actions to which they are subjected. To finish, we shall present the results obtained using ALMEC for the two numerical models comprising one and 10 sleepers. As may be deduced from the complexity of the problem, the numerical model requires geometrically discretizing at least 10 sleepers in order to take into account the different materials and applied loads. Constructing a mesh of the entire model with the same degree of detail is not feasible, as the number of nodes and areas that are generated render the numerical model inoperative. Therefore, we decided to construct a different mesh for each structural element, using geometric interfaces to bond each segment of the mesh. From the geometric point of view, an interface is a surface that connects two segments of a hexahedral mesh with distinct mesh densities and which allows the values of one segment of mesh and those of the other segment to be interpolated while maintaining the continuity of the model. It may be seen as a structural element that appropriately distributes the stresses on both meshes in order to maintain the homogeneity of the 3D model. We illustrate this concept in  Seeing that in our case the intermediate element that permits the loads on the rail to pass to the ground is the sleeper, the anchored nodes on which we have defined the interfaces are those corresponding to the nodes of the sleeper. The contact nodes correspond to the lower part of the rail and the upper part of the ballast. The following materials were considered in the 3D models (see Material A: The rail was assumed to behave elastically, with a deformation modulus of 2100 Material B: The sleepers were also assumed to behave elastically, with a deformation modulus of 54 Material C: The ballast situated at the sides of the track, with a thickness of 50 Three additional materials were considered for the ground formed by the subgrade and the ballast located under each sleeper, which did suffer the effect of the torpedo wagons. The conducted load plate tests made it evident that the properties of this ground are different under the North rail, in the Centre of the track and under the South rail. We have Material D for the North rail, Material E for the Centre, and Material F for the South rail. The properties of each material are shown in The properties in Considering the different properties according to whether the sleeper is fractured or stable will allow us to simulate the two models; one in which failure occurs and another in which failure of the sleepers is not produced. By comparing the two models, we may thus better determine the causes of sleeper failure. In this case, the equilibrium stress state of the entire system is altered by the existence of two types of actions: The prestressing of the sleepers, which was simulated as a series of horizontal loads applied to the edge of the sleepers, with a compressive effect. The value of these loads, the application of which was shared by the two faces of the corresponding sleeper, was calculated to give a resultant of 27  The load produced by the torpedo wagons, which in this case was simulated as a vertical force representing the weight transmitted by each of the torpedo wheels, was assumed to be equal to 18.5 In While The calculation method consisted in determining the deformations and stresses that are produced for the one-sleeper model and the 10-sleeper model, considering two cases: stable sleepers and fractured sleepers. Depending on each case, appropriate values were taken for the properties of Materials D, E and F indicated in The obtained results are summarized below, starting with the one-sleeper model and ending with the 10-sleeper case. If we consider the properties of materials that do not produce failure of the sleeper, we obtain a distribution of displacements as shown in Each colour represents a stress or displacement interval; the legend for which can be seen on the right of the figure. The units employed as those of the International System, in Pa for stresses and in meters for displacements. Negative pressure values correspond to compression, while positive values correspond to traction. When representing displacements, negative values indicate settlement, while positive values indicated swelling. The maximum settlements obtained for the model in XX deformations are shown in The XX stresses measured in the concrete are of great interest from the point of view of stress as they give an idea of the traction phenomena to which the sleepers are subjected.  As regards the vertical stresses that the sleeper transmits to the ballast, these are different in the North, Centre and South segments of the sleeper, as can be seen in In the South rail, the stresses are lower (6–7 If we now consider the properties of the materials that produce sleeper failure, we shall have a distribution of displacements as shown in  In this model, the greatest microdeformations that are produced are in the order of 203 As regards the ZZ stresses in the ballast, maximum compression occurs in the limit between the Centre and South materials, due to the effect of the deformation of the sleeper which is not displaced in the Centre, while the South segment sinks 1.3 Following the same methodology as in the previous case, the displacements and stresses were calculated in the 10-sleeper model, considering the materials that maintain the sleepers stable and those that produce fractured sleepers. The sleepers were identified by numbering them from 1 to 10 starting from the front of the model, as shown in The North segment is on the left and the South segment on the right.    Let us know compare these results with those obtained for the case of 10 sleepers situated on materials that correspond to areas with fractured sleepers. That is to say, the settlement produced in the South segment is not accompanied by subsidence in the Centre or North segments. This is due to the fact that the rigidity of the ballast in the Centre and North segments is not capable of transmitting the stresses uniformly.   Summarizing the results of the 3D models analyzed using the ALMEC program, the existence under the same sleeper of very different properties leads to the appearance of microdeformations in the sleeper of more than 150 Whereas the deformations of the South side are practically absorbed by the settlement of the ballast, in the case of the North side, the rigidity and compactness of the ballast, which under normal conditions would be optimum, prevents the existence of sufficient deformation in the substructure of the track to compensate that produced by the passing of the loaded torpedo wagons. Therefore, it is precisely in this North segment in which the cracks appear that lead to the final failure of the sleepers. The main conclusion to be drawn from this study is that no single cause can be found for the cracking of the sleepers, but rather that a series of factors exist that would not be decisive in isolation but which are so when acting in conjunction. More precisely, we may conclude that: Analysis of the sleepers allows us to rule out anomalies in their manufacture or in their technical characteristics. However, it is clear that these sleepers were not designed for the axle loads transmitted by the torpedo wagons and thus work at their strength limit and do not suffer mass failure thanks to their manufacturing safety factors. Seeing that the sleepers must work under limit conditions, which are imposed by the heavy freight loads, the status of the ballast–subgrade system is determinant in the appearance of cracks. Thus, any deficiency in one of these two elements may bring about failure of the sleepers. Throughout this study, faults and anomalies were detected in both the ballast and the subgrade. The ballast presents a lower grain size than recommended. A high content in particles smaller than 20 The subgrade presents deficiencies at some points on the track, with CBR indexes below 5. According to the recommendations of different authors for these types of loads, this value should be higher than 20. The penetration tests carried out show considerable heterogeneity in the bearing capacity of the subgrade. The problems of the ballast in conjunction with those of the subgrade condition the existence of a great variety of properties in the ballast–subgrade system, as shown by the load plate tests. In these tests, it was observed that the ballast coefficients at the sides under one and the same sleeper may vary between 13 and 580 The results obtained via instrumentation of the track enabled us to observe the evolution of the displacements of the sleepers and the pressures on the ballast as the train passes. The maximum measured settlement, around 2.6 As can be appreciated in the 3D models constructed using the ALMEC program, the existence under one and the same sleeper of very different properties leads to the appearance of microdeformations in the sleeper of more than 150 On the basis of the observed problems, the following recommendations are made: Increase the CBR of the subgrade and standardize this at least transversally, thus making the North and South segments behave similarly. Improve the strength of the fragility of the ballast in order to reduce its degradation, which would be achieved by using another type of quartzite that is stronger, or even granite. Improve the design of the concrete sleepers, increasing their cross-section and their prestressing, as a result of which they would take longer to fracture. The strength characteristics of the baseplates should be improved owing to the fact that they laminate as a result of heavy freight loads. The frequency of ballast maintenance on the track should be increased so as to increase, as far as possible, the life of each one of the strength elements that depend on the ballast, especially the sleepers. The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Paul Barnes in the preparation of this paper in English. The authors also wish to express their gratitude to the management and staff of Aceralia for allowing