Vertical shear fractures of the medial malleolus are less common than transverse fractures. These fractures are often treated with lag screws, posteromedial buttress plating, antiglide plates, and neutralization plates with screws. We report on a 37-year-old male who had fractured his ankle after tripping and falling into a ditch. Initially, the patient was treated with closed reduction and a splint for a trimalleolar fracture with a laterally subluxed talus. However, on review of his preoperative radiographs and computed tomography studies, we confirmed a medial malleolus fracture with a vertical shear pattern and communition. Recently, a contoured fibular locking plate has been developed. We considered this plate to be effective for containing the bone in part because of its broader plate design. We present a case in which a fibular locking plate was used successfully as a neutralization plate as an alternative fixation method for a vertical shear medial malleolar fracture.Fractures of the ankle are among the most common and frequently treated musculoskeletal injuries, in addition to hip and wrist fractures, and ankle and wrist fractures each account for approximately 10% of fractures in those aged ≥60 years The objective of the present case report was to demonstrate the clinical results of an alternative fixation method for the treatment of a medial malleolus vertical shear fracture using a fibular locking plate. In April 2010, a 37-year-old male tripped and fell into a ditch, fracturing his ankle. The patient stated he had experienced immediate, nonradiating distal ankle pain after the fall. He described sensory changes over the entire left foot in a nonspecific dermatomal pattern. The patient was unable to ambulate or bear weight, and he was not able to actively perform plantar flexion, dorsiflexion, or wiggling of his toes. He denied any other musculoskeletal complaints at that time. The left lower extremity on presentation had a splint placed from an outside facility, which was taken down to show intact skin with moderate swelling and fracture blisters. Ecchymosis was most significantly present over the medial aspect of the ankle and global swelling around the ankle joint itself and the foot. He had palpable pulses. The right lower extremity had full, pain-free active range of motion and palpable pulses. The rest of the social history and physical examination findings revealed that he smoked 10 to 20 cigarettes daily. The radiographs from the outside facility were reviewed and showed a trimalleolar fracture that had a subluxed talus laterally. The fracture pattern appeared to be supination adduction. The management options were discussed with the patient, and open reduction internal fixation was recommended for definitive management. Because of the swelling and fracture blisters, the patient was unable to undergo the chosen procedure for approximately 9 days after the initial incident. A review of his preoperative films revealed suspicion for a vertical shear pattern to the medial malleolus fracture ( The patient was positioned supine with a bump under his left hip, and a tourniquet was applied to the thigh. After application of a standard aseptic technique, the surgical procedure began with fixation of the fibula through a posterolateral approach. The fracture did have some comminution and was long and oblique in nature. Instead of using the lateral malleolus plate, a posterior one-third tubular plate with a lag screw was used on the fibula fracture. The bump was removed and attention turned to the medial side of the ankle. A linear incision was made, centered over the medial malleolus, and the fracture was provisionally reduced with a Kirschner wire. The Kirschner wire was left in place to limit the chance of rotation when the compression screw was placed. The Stryker At 2 weeks postoperatively, the incisions were well healed with no drainage. The patient had intact sensation and extensor hallucis longus function, and he was able to wiggle his toes. Most of the staples on his medial ankle area were removed. Only a couple of staples were removed from the lateral incision, because swelling was present. The patient was placed back in a 3-sided splint. At 23 days postoperatively, the remaining staples and sutures were removed. He had no evidence of infection or pressure sores. He was placed in a cast and continued non-weightbearing status. At 6 weeks postoperatively, his cast became wet and fell off. He reported back to the emergency department to undergo have the cast replaced. He denied weightbearing since the cast had fallen off. At that point, sensation was intact, no swelling was present, and the incision site appeared to be healing well with no erythema or drainage. At his clinic visit (53 days postoperatively), he was placed in a controlled ankle motion walker boot and prescribed physical therapy, with toe touch weightbearing to progress as tolerated. The patient was able to perform dorsiflexion, plantar flexion, knee flexion, and extension. At approximately 12 weeks of follow-up, the patient had begun full weightbearing to the left lower extremity. He had no complaints of implant irritation. He demonstrated a healing fracture and symmetric mortise on plain films ( Ankle fractures are common injuries A review of the published data resulted in no other documentation of a predesigned periarticular distal fibular locking plate used on the medial malleolus. We used a Stryker The use of the fibular locking plate was decided because compared with the one-third tubular plate, the fibular locking plate is wider, allowing greater containment of the bone and is sufficiently strong to endure loading The present case study has demonstrated the potential for an alternative implant to an antiglide plate for use as a neutralization plate for the fixation of vertical shear medial malleolus ankle fractures. In our patient, a risk existed of creating more comminution, and the medial malleolus was thinned out posteriorly. Thus, the use of combined techniques for managing vertical shear fracture patterns was successful because the fibular locking plate covered more surface area of the bone and the compression screw and Kirschner wire prevented additional shearing and rotation. Additional studies are necessary to further define the outcomes and to determine any complications with the use of combined treatment techniques. We would like to thank Elisha Chance, BSAS, Marina Hanes, BA, and Barbara Hileman, BA, from the Trauma Research Department at St. Elizabeth Health Center for their formatting and editing assistance.