Aims
                  Decision-making in management of clavicle fractures is often based on the degree of displacement and shortening present on plain radiographs. We aimed to evaluate whether plain radiographs provide an accurate representation of the true displacement present, which can be difficult to image in orthogonal planes.
               
                  Methods
                  Consecutive high-energy trauma patients with midshaft clavicular fractures requiring further CT imaging of the thorax/abdomen for other associated injuries between 2009 and 2012 were evaluated. The plain radiographs and CT scan were both performed at initial presentation. Displacement and shortening of the clavicle fracture were assessed on the standard clavicle views and then compared with the axial images obtained from CT scans.
               
                  Results
                  26 patients admitted following a high-energy trauma that necessitated CT scan of chest/abdomen/pelvis were included. All patients also underwent standard clavicle view radiographs at the same initial assessment. Displacement varied from 0 to 233%. Shortening was measured as between 0 and 29mm. The displacement measured on the CT scan was a mean of 19% greater than the AP view and 11% greater than the 20° caudal. This difference was found to be statistically significant (p
                     =0.019) between the AP view and the axial view on CT. The difference between 20° caudal views did not extend to statistical significance (p
                     =0.211). There were no significant differences found between the two modalities on assessment of shortening.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Plain radiographs give an accurate representation of the shortening present in midshaft clavicle fractures. Displacement may be underestimated if the standard AP and 20° caudal views alone are relied upon.Displaced fractures of the midshaft of the clavicle have historically been treated with largely conservative measures. Recent research has suggested that the operative fixation of certain fractures may lead to the decreased rates of non-union and better functional outcomes. Different criteria have been described involving the degree of displacement of the fracture. The landmark Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Society trial The measurement of true displacement of clavicle fractures is difficult due to the technical challenges of obtaining 2 orthogonal views with plain radiographs. With modern trauma management and increased access to CT scanning, patients with significant trauma are often imaged with CT in the emergency setting to rule out thoracic, abdominal or spinal trauma. These axial CT images provide an opportunity to identify the true antero-posterior displacement of a concomitant clavicle fracture in a trauma patient. We aim to demonstrate the difference between the apparent characteristics of clavicle fractures on the standard trauma series with the true fracture displacement demonstrable on an axial CT slice. Standard radiographic imaging for the clavicle includes 2 views at our institution (AP and 20° caudal inclination). The database was searched to retrospectively identify all patients with acute clavicle fractures between 2009 and 2012 who were imaged using the above views. Patients were cross-referenced to identify those who required further computerised axial tomography (CT) of the thorax for associated traumatic injuries, performed concurrently at the initial presentation. All imaging was assessed though use of the Picture Archiving and Communication System (Sectra Workstation IDS5; Sectra Imtec AB, Sweden, 2009). Plain radiographs and axial CT imaging were assessed for shortening, displacement and presence of comminution. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 11.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) for Macintosh. The Wilcoxon signed rank test for non-parametric, related samples was used for analysis of statistical significance. Pearson's rho correlation co-efficient was used to test agreement between the reviewers. Unless otherwise stated, categorical variables are expressed as frequency (%), and continuous variables are expressed as mean (range) with Twenty-six consecutive trauma patients with midshaft clavicular fractures requiring further CT imaging of the thorax were identified between 2009 and 2012. The mechanism of injury in each injury was sufficient to activate the trauma protocol; patient demographics are included in Displacement ranged from 0 to 233% as measured on the plain radiographs. On CT, the range was from 0 to 170%. The difference between displacement measured on plain radiographs and axial CT was a mean of 18.95% (range 0–123%; Assessment of shortening did not reveal a significant difference between measurements made using plain radiographs and with axial CT. Shortening ranged between 0 and 20 Comminution was identified in the fractures of 14/26 patients. Each patient with comminution evident on plain films had this visible on the axial CT, with no additional comminution detected by CT whereas it was not visible on plain films. Comparison between the two reviewers with use of the Pearson correlation coefficient demonstrated excellent interobserver agreement for both plain radiographs ( While the indication for operative fixation of displaced mid-shaft clavicle fracture has not yet been agreed upon, the current evidence would suggest that the degree of fracture displacement is a key factor to determining risk of non-union or poor clinical outcome. We hypothesised that the displacement and angulation of a clavicle fracture can be determined relatively easily in the cranial caudal plane with plain radiographs but the inability to achieve orthogonal views with plain radiographs of the clavicle would lead to a significant underestimation of the degree of displacement actually present in many clavicle fractures (illustrated in Although an attempt has previously been made at devising a series of clavicle radiograph views which improve the evaluation of deformity present following fracture, The findings of this study demonstrate a significant under-representation of the fracture displacement by 10.8% of the diaphyseal diameter, which supports the hypothesis. Comminution was demonstrated to be detectable with both plain film and axial CT imaging, suggesting no additional benefit in the additional view for this purpose. The interobserver correlation between the investigators was very good ( It is unclear as to which deformity, shortening, angulation or displacement is associated with the highest incidence of non-union or poor clinical outcome; however, it would seem that posterior displacement of the lateral fragment could affect the rate of union and also potentially have a significant effect on compromising the thoracic outlet. This study suggests that consideration of the 3-dimensional morphology of the fracture should be taken in the assessment of displacement when relying on standard radiographs alone. However, it should be noted that while this method does allow a more accurate assessment of displacement in clavicle fractures, the application to the current literature must be with some caution. In the suggestion of limits of displacement, over which surgical treatment would be advocated, each trial has relied on measurements on plain radiographs, with any systemic error therefore potentially included. The question then arises: is it displacement in any plane that is important, or displacement only as measured with this technique? Common sense would suggest the former, although there are not yet the data to corroborate this. The authors do not suggest that CT should be used to assess the true displacement of clavicle fractures, but clearly it can be helpful in the decision making when available in the traumatised patient. CT potentially could be used in a further similar study to validate clavicle radiographic protocols. Plain radiographs give an accurate representation of the shortening and comminution present in mid-shaft clavicle fractures. Displacement, however, may be underestimated if the standard AP and 20° caudal views alone are relied upon. The authors have none to declare.