The disability associated with foot and ankle trauma is reinforced by outcome measures that universally weight foot trauma heavily. In order to optimise outcome, clear objectives must be established. This article attempts to summarise the management principles used to address some of the major issues in the traumatised foot.The human foot is designed to support and propel the body's weight in the upright position and act as a stable proprioceptive interface between it and variable contact terrains during the gait cycle. These basic roles are accomplished through complex osseous and soft tissue interactions which enable instantaneous configurative transformations between a rigid lever and a flexible shock absorbing, accommodative platform. This is in conjunction with a durable pressure resistant plantar envelope with appropriate sensory feedback. Complex foot trauma can compromise this fine functional balance at all these levels and disability may be profound The goals of acute and salvage reconstructions are essentially the same, namely the achievement of soft tissue and osseous equilibrium, facilitating early rehabilitation. The principles are:      Management of secondary deformity, post traumatic arthrosis or osteonecrosis, should endeavour to recapitulate these premises where possible, acknowledging the role of arthrodesis, and arthroplasty. This article attempts to summarise the management strategies used to address a number of issues in the traumatised foot. Extensive soft tissue loss over the foot and ankle, even with the advent of microsurgical techniques and the evolution of plastic surgery, can still pose a significant challenge. A finite local donor soft tissue envelope, a relatively limited vascular ingress and the requirement of a specialised plantar unit designed for shock absorption and frictional loading, all contribute to the complexity of any reconstructive procedure. The ultimate goals of any soft tissue reconstruction are the creation of stable, well contoured, durable, pain free, cover, permitting the fitting of near-normal footwear. Sensibility and aesthetics further compliment these objectives. The depth, size, location (weight bearing or not), complexity as well as patient expectation and surgeon experience all influence the surgical options and the direction of management. There is no equivalent tissue to replace the plantar soft tissues. Though muscle flaps can be used, they are insensate and not ideal for weight bearing. Most non weight bearing soft tissue injuries can be treated with wound management, skin graft, rotational flap or free tissue transfer. VAC (Vacuum Assisted Closure) therapy has revolutionised wound care, not least post trauma and though the literature is sparse, it is widely used in the management of soft tissue defects of the foot and ankle. Negative pressure promotes granulation formation, centripetal closure and good wound toilet, with documented reductions in bacterial counts. Exposed tendon, bone and hardware are not beyond its remit and the generation of a rich vascular bed suitable for cover, can be complemented by using VAC dressings in conjunction with cutaneous grafting where they facilitate inosculation. Often VAC therapy alone can avoid the need for donor procedures altogether Non weight bearing coverage should accommodate joint motion and facilitate tendon excursion. Small defects can be addressed, depending on their depth with cutaneous grafting or local random and pedicle flaps Weightbearing wounds are more demanding technically, where a durable cover, resistant to compressive loading and shear is required. The medial plantar pedicled flap or instep island flap, can offer sensate plantar heel cover up to 6×10 The importance of weight bearing sensibility is controversial. Free flaps, offer little chance of spontaneous sensory recovery. Nerve coaptation is necessary if foot sensitivity is desired. However no correlation has been demonstrated between improved sensory function and prevention of ulceration. Most surgeons are in agreement that weightbearing sensibility is not a requirement for longterm durable function The suboptimal results of masterly observation, together with an awareness of local soft tissue vulnerability and improvements in operative technique, mean that open reduction internal fixation through a lateral extensile approach is becoming the standard of treatment for most intraarticular os calcis fractures. Salvage of both the nonoperative and operatively treated os calcis fractures remains a commonly performed reconstructive intervention. At the time of injury the tuberosity fragment translates superolaterally along the primary fracture line and typically assumes a varus orientation relative to the constant sustentaculum. The resultant symptoms depend on the combination and extent of increased heel width, decreased height and length, and hindfoot varus Malunited fractures present with a myriad of issues including, peroneal impingement, heel widening and pain, ankle impingement, acquired flat foot deformity, hindfoot varus with locking of the Chopart joints. Intraarticular malunion and cartilage injury predispose to subtalar and calcaneocuboid arthrois in all patient treatment groups The objectives in any delayed reconstruction are essentially the same as at the primary intervention, namely restoration of gross calcaneal morphology. Lateral exostectomy and peroneal tenolysis, subtalar chieletomy and calcaneal osteotomy procedures attempt to do this Isolated subtalar arthrodesis addresses articular pathology only, and is indicated in minimal deformity cases, where union rates are >90% and patient satisfaction pain and outcome scores are good. Distraction bone block arthrodesis can restore talar declination and the gastrosoleus moment arm as well as decompressing the peroneal space and correcting the varus hindfoot ( An extensive articular surface, precarious vascularity and complex peritalar biomechanics compounded by an invariably high energy trauma and associated soft tissue compromise highlight the significance of all fractures involving this pivotal structure The major complications of talar fractures include malunion, non-union, avascular collapse and post traumatic arthrosis and often these occur in combination. Malunion of neck fractures either through closed management or inadequate reduction typically results in varus and dorsiflexion deformity which translates to limited ankle dorsiflexion and locking of the Chopart joints. Malalignments of only 2 Talar avascular necrosis represents a more complex reconstructive challenge, with both hindfoot joints compromised and indirectly the Chopart articulations Allograft reconstruction, and custom arthroplasty series offer variable success but reports are limited by patient number and follow-up while a well fashioned transtibial amputation sometimes still represents the best solution in well counselled individual cases In the infected osteonecrosis setting, staged procedures to eradicate or optimise infection levels, through hardware removal, stabilisation beyond the infected field, aggressive local and systemic antibiotic therapy can be followed by a definitive fusion procedure. Normal midfoot function is integral to normal gait. Firstly, as the link between the hindfoot and midfoot, changes in the configuration of the Chopart joints impart either flexibility or stiffness as required. Secondly, talonavicular motion contributes significantly to subtalar motion Midfoot fracture dislocations are invariably high energy and comminution is the rule. Goals are again directed firstly at damage limitation, through stabilising the soft tissue envelope, reduction of dislocations and restoration of alignment often aided by external fixation. Interval reconstruction follows, the principles being directed toward restoration of bicolumnar integrity and their relationship to the hindfoot, while preserving motion at the talonavicular and calaneonavicular articulations Anatomic navicular reduction is crucial for reasons mentioned, and outcomes are dictated by injury severity Laterally, the objective is restoration of columnar length. Shortening may occur through the anterior process of the os calcis, the cuboid or 4 The management of the late sequelae of midfoot trauma namely malunion(cavus or flatfoot), non-union and post traumatic midfoot arthrois follow the objectives of restoration of columnar alignment and length. Arthrodesis of essential joints carries the burden of motion loss and as yet there is no long-term reliable salvage for cuboid metatarsal arthrosis. The literature supports undeniably that anatomic reduction and stable fixation is predictive of optimal clinical results Whether primary or salvage, arthrodesis procedures should be limited to the medial rays, preserving motion where possible at the 4 The disproportionate impact of foot trauma on overall disability, in isolation or in the multiply injured patient is well documented. Outcome measures universally tend to weight foot trauma heavily. This highlights the importance of recognising these injuries for what they are, and imparts an obligation to optimise all reconstruction and rehabilitation efforts. Optimal outcome can be achieved by respecting certain surgical principles which seek to restore and preserve form and function.