Froth flotation has been proved to be the economic way to upgrade the low-grade diasporic bauxites by desilication of kaolinite. However, the recovery rate of diaspore varied significantly in industry due to water quality (cations) and the mechanism remains unknown. This report investigates the effect of common water hardness cations (Ca2+ and Mg2+) on the recovery of diaspore and kaolinite using micro-flotation at various pH values. The results show that adding Ca2+ significantly enhanced the diaspore recovery rate even under acidic conditions (pH = 4–7). In contrast, adding Mg2+ reduced the diaspore recovery rate to below 50% when the pH value was between 8 and 9 while adding Ca2+ increase the recovery rate to above 95%. In addition, adding either cation shows minimal change to the recovery of kaolinite. The mechanism has been revealed by thermodynamics speciation, zeta potential and synchrotron-based near edge X-ray adsorption fine structure (NEXAFS) spectroscopy. The change of both dipole-dipole interaction and hydrogen bonding plays a vital role on this cation effect.Currently bauxite has been the main feed for producing alumina (α-Al Froth flotation has been proven to be one processing option and has been widely applied to improve the Al/Si mass ratio of low grade diasporic bauxite ( As for flotation of oxides minerals, water hardness cations also have an important effect on the adsorption of collectors on ore surfaces. In strongly alkaline solutions, Ca Recently, with the advances of high-brilliance and flux, wide energy spectrum and high purity, synchrotron radiation based facility is becoming one of the most advanced methods for surface analysis and has been widely used in the investigation of graphene, nano-materials and catalysts ( In this study, micro-flotation tests were conducted using pure diaspore and kaolinite ore samples to evaluate the cation (Ca The diaspore and kaolinite samples were taken from Shanxi province of China, and the purity of the samples was confirmed by chemical analysis and XRD tests. Analytical calcium chloride dehydrate (CaCl The froth flotation experiments were conducted in a micro-flotation machine ( The zeta potential of the samples was measured by a ZetaPALS instrument (Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, Brookhaven, NY, USA). Samples with the weight of 0.025 g were added to a stirring container with 50 mL 0.01 mol/L KCl solution. The pH value was adjusted, and Ca The samples were prepared with the same conditioning regime as the micro-flotation tests, and the pH value was conditioned to 9. Samples were filtrated, rinsed and dried for synchrotron radiation NEXAFS tests. The synchrotron NEXAFS spectra were obtained from beamline 4B9B of the Beijing synchrotron radiation facility (BSRF) of China. Vacuum was controlled in the sample chamber, and the energy position of spectra were confirmed by Au standard sample. The data analyses were completed by ATHENA 0.9.25 software ( The results of X-ray diffraction (XRD) and chemical analysis for diaspore and kaolinite samples are shown in  The results of micro-flotation show that water hardness cations had an important effect on the flotation of diaspore, Ca The results in Eqs. According to solution chemistry theory, the speciation diagram of calcium and magnesium ions under different pH value can be established. It was reported that pH value had an important influence on zeta potential (   When adding surfactant as shown in As for kaolinite, Synchrotron radiation NEXAFS has the ability to present fine variation of chemical structure and chemical interactions, so it can be used to investigate the mechanism of the cation effect on the adsorption of surfactant in diasporic bauxite flotation.  Therefore, it can be concluded that with the addition of Mg There are three models for cations adsorbing on mineral surfaces, ion-dipole interaction adsorption, monohydric compound adsorption, and hydroxide compound adsorption ( The effect of water hardness cations (Ca This research was funded by