A coupled simulation strategy combining the embedded discrete fracture method (EDFM) and the extended finite element method (X-FEM) is developed to simulate the fluid driven fracture propagation process in porous media. This physical process includes three strong coupling mechanics: fluid flow in fractures and porous media, solid deformation with fractures, and fracture propagations. The EDFM and X-FEM are used to simulate fracture-related fluid mechanics and solid mechanics, respectively, with information exchanged under the iterative numerical coupling scheme. Mathematical equations on how to link these independent modules as well as numerical techniques on how to accelerate the coupling convergence rate are discussed in detail.
                  Both X-FEM and EDFM avoid the cumbersome construction of unstructured grids to capture fracture paths and also avoid the remeshing for the fracture growth. They are first validated via benchmark problems individually and then are coupled to simulate fracture propagation problems in two dimensions and in three dimensions. Simulated multiphysics fields meet understandings qualitatively, and simulated fracture parameters (length, width and net pressure) match with analytical solutions quantitatively.The fluid-driven fracture propagation in porous media is a fundamental process to many applications in petroleum and mining engineering, such as hydraulic fracturing, produced water reinjection, borehole integrity, and drill cuttings reinjection. Quantitative evaluations of relevant fracture parameters are essential for the design analysis of these engineerings. However, modeling such a process is not an easy task because at least three strong coupling mechanics ( The pioneering contributors tried solving these coupled non-linear integral-differential equations by an analytical approach. Several classic fracturing models (PKN, KGD and Penny-shaped fracture model) were developed. Later on, some pseudo-3D numerical tools were developed to simulate complex geometry problems with various finite element-based methods. Fluid leakoff rate through fracture surfaces into the porous media in these numerical tools is quantified by The finite element method (FEM) The embedded discrete fracture method These novel discrete fracture methods enable us to conduct an analysis on the fluid-driven fracture propagation process. Lecampion investigated how to consider the presence of internal pressure inside the fracture. The objective of the present research is to construct a coupled numerical approach combining X-FEM and EDFM to simulate both 2D and 3D fluid-driven fracture propagation processes in the porous media. This study will also demonstrate the effectiveness of the simulation technique in predicting the complex processes. This paper is arranged as follows. Governing equations, numerical discretization approaches as well as the EDFM and X-FEM principles are briefly introduced in Section This numerical study aims to understand the coupling between fluid flow and solid deformation during fluid-driven fracture propagations in porous media. These two physical processes have entirely different natures and behaviors, and thus they are characterized by different governing equations. Correspondingly, two different numerical schemes are adopted to solve these two sets of equations. The finite volume method (also known as the integral finite difference method) is preferred for discretizing fluid flow PDEs because it captures local conservations naturally, while the finite element method is adopted for solid mechanics because it is intuitive for the displacement compatibility. The embedded discrete fracture method and the extended finite element method are two modeling techniques based on the finite volume method and the finite element method, respectively, for the fracture-related mechanics analysis. Both methods allow for the simulation related to fractures with structured grids. Thus, considerable flexibility is achieved by avoiding the construction of unstructured grids, which is quite challenging for complex three-dimensional fractures. The process of the fluid flow in porous and fractured media is governed by the mass conservation equation along with Darcy's law: With the integral finite difference method, the discrete nonlinear equations of Eq. In the EDFM, fractures are conceptualized to be virtually embedded into nearby matrix grid blocks by treating them as a single or as several additional computational volume elements. The fracture thickness is only considered in the computational domain for fracture volume calculations, but not represented in the grid domain, because fracture thickness is several orders of magnitude smaller than the grid size. These fracture volume elements connect to nearby matrix elements as well as connecting to adjacent fracture elements. Such connection information can be directly obtained through geometric processes, which calculate two critical parameters: the fracture-matrix contacting area and the average distance. In our previous work, we described a general geometrical calculation algorithm for complicated 3D fractures, proved this approach is accurate to handle steady and pseudo-steady state flow, and validated the EDFM approach by several numerical experiments. The weak form of the stress equilibrium equation provides us with the principle of virtual displacements: Rewrite Eq. In Eq. In the X-FEM method, in addition to local element nodes according to the finite element method, the near fracture area is enriched by incorporating both discontinuous fields and the near-tip asymptotic fields.  Strong fluid-solid coupling mechanics make the simulation of fluid-driven fracture propagation processes quite challenging. At least three physical processes (fluid flow, solid deformation, and fracture growth) and five relationships need to be considered Solid deformation affects fluid flow by changing fracture widths, which determines the fracture permeability as well as the fracture volume. The crack opening displacement, as shown in Each internal displacement can be discretized as a linear combination of node displacements. Thus, the crack opening displacement can be obtained from the node displacement vector. This expression can be further simplified considering only the Heaviside function and the first asymptotic crack tip function in Eq. For a given fracture segment, its aperture is the length of the displacement: The fracture aperture determines the fracture permeability according to the cubic law: The volume of fracture element, as shown in Eq. Fluid flow induces solid deformation by the hydraulic loading acting on crack surfaces. As shown in In the weak form of stress equilibrium, this boundary condition appears in the residual part: Substitute Eq. The equation above indicates the pressure force acting on the fracture surface can be transferred to the force acting on element nodes, which can be incorporated directly into the According to the theory of linear elastic fracture mechanics, a fracture can propagate if the stress intensity factor exceeds the fracture toughness. In this study, we use the maximum circumferential stress criterion for two-dimensional scenarios. In Eq. For 3D cases, the mode I stress intensity factor at the fracture tip can be calculated as (Yew and Weng 2014) The growth of fractures changes solid- and fluid-mechanical behaviors of the system, which are captured by the X-FEM and the EDFM without remeshing. The fracture path can be obtained explicitly by a set of discrete points or implicitly via the level-set method. In X-FEM, as indicated in Eq. Three different routines are developed adequately: (1) modeling fluid flow in porous media with fractures based on the EDFM; (2) modeling solid deformation with fractures based on the X-FEM; and (3) determining if fracture propagates (if yes, calculating propagation length and directions). These three strongly interacted modules are coupled in two stages, as demonstrated in The iterative coupling method is selected for the coupling between fluid flow and solid deformation in the inner loop. Fluid flow variables and geomechanics variables are solved separately and sequentially by corresponding routines, and the coupling terms are interacted on at each time step. Data transfer between these two routines is described in sections above. The iterative coupling procedure is repeated until a satisfactory convergent fracture width is obtained. The criterion of convergence is Note that this iterative method uses an initial guess to generate successive approximations to the solution. For the first time step, this initial estimate is obtained by pre-running the iterative coupling with an infinite fracture permeability. For the following time steps, the converged result at the last time step is used. The Picard iteration technique is adopted to mitigate numerical oscillations and accelerate the convergence rate. Once the iteration between these two modules is converged, the stress intensity factor is calculated and compared with the fracture toughness to determine if the fracture propagates (Eq. In this section, two numerical experiments are conducted to evaluate the accuracy of our developed X-FEM and EDFM codes. The in-house program used in this paper is written in MATLAB. The X-FEM codes are developed based on an open-source 2D MATLAB X-FEM codes. An angled center crack is put inside a plate which is subjected to a far-field uniaxial stress. The plate dimensions are five times larger than the crack length to approximate the infinite setting. The exact stress intensify factors for the infinite plate is given A series of numerical experiments are conducted by rotating the center crack. An angled center crack is put inside a closed-boundary 2D reservoir with the unit thickness. Fluid is produced at a constant rate from the fracture center. Gringarten et al. give the general analytical solution of the well pressure with a “uniform flux” or “infinite-conductivity” vertical fracture The developed coupling method is here applied to two fracture propagation problems in two dimensions and three dimensions, respectively. Models designed for these two problems are based on the classical KGD model and the penny-shaped fracture model. The primary objective of these two examples is to demonstrate the capacity of our developed numerical coupling approach in accurately simulating the complex multiphysics in the fracture propagation process. Note that though fracture geometries in these two illustrative examples are relatively simple, the coupling approach is applicable for complicated-geometry cases because both X-FEM and EDFM can handle fractures with complicated geometries. This section simulates a 2D hydraulic fracture propagation problem. The model designed is based on the classical Khristianovic-Geertsma-de Klerk (KGD) model. As demonstrated in  A series of numerical tests are then conducted by varying the grid size and initial fracture length to investigate their influence on simulated fracture geometry. Detailed input parameters, as well as simulated fracture inlet widths, are demonstrated in The penny-shape fracture propagation problem involves an axisymmetric hydraulic fracture propagation in a 3D infinite elastic medium. In this problem, the formation of Young's modulus is Only a quarter of the fracture is simulated by considering symmetry in this problem. The fracture is positioned in the mid of the X-axis. This quarter-model has dimensions of In addition to the base case, three other cases are simulated with different fracture toughness (0,  We also conducted a sensitivity analysis concerning the reservoir permeability. Three cases with various formation permeability ( This coupling algorithm can calculate six stress components (three normal stresses and three shear stresses) and one fluid pressure with time. Here we show 3D contours of the simulated fluid pressure, xx-normal stress and xy-shear stress after 5 min of injections for the case with the permeability of  1. We present a coupled simulation strategy combining the embedded discrete fracture method and the extended finite element method to simulate the fluid-driven fracture propagation process in porous media. Key physics in this process includes three strong coupling mechanics: fluid flow in fractures and porous media, solid deformation with fractures, and fracture propagations can be captured through this numerical approach. Both EDFM and X-FEM avoid the cumbersome construction of unstructured grids to capture fracture paths for fracture-related fluid mechanics and solid mechanics. They also avoid the remeshing for the fracture growth. 2. Mathematical equations on how to link these independent modules as well as numerical techniques on how to accelerate the coupling convergence rate are discussed in detail. The link from fluid flow to solid deformation treats the fluid pressure force on the fracture surface as an internal boundary. The converse link takes the calculated fracture widths and corrects fracture permeability and the fracture volume. The growth of fracture path is calculated based on the stress field from the X-FEM simulation. This fracture growth, in turn, changes solid- and fluid-mechanical behaviors of the system, which are captured by the reconstruction of equations in EDFM and X-FEM. 3. The EDFM and X-FEM are validated via benchmark problems individually and then are coupled to simulate fracture propagation problems in two dimensions and in three dimensions. Simulated multiphysics fields meet understandings qualitatively, and simulated fracture parameters (length, width and net pressure) match with analytical solutions (KGD for 2D problems and Penny-shaped fracture model for 3D problems) quantitatively. 4. In this 3D demonstration example, because we assume the formation is homogeneous and isotropic, the fracture propagates following a penny shape, and thus the front shape can be controlled just by the radius. For more complicated 3D applications, tracking the 3D fracture surface and capturing the fracture paths, determining the direction and length of fracture growth are challenging and not covered in this work. Further development addressing these questions will enable this numerical tool for more complicated and practical engineering analysis. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported in part by