Phosphorus (P) recovery from SSA (sewage sludge ashes) is highly relevant to address future P-shortages. Efficient recycling strategies require an in-depth knowledge of P-phases present. These may be subject to changes during treatment. Treatment was simulated, initial and treated material studied using automated mineralogy. Automated mineralogy, using the MLA system, is an established tool in ore processing evaluation and adapted here to examine P-phases in SSA. Coupling SSA treatment for P-recovery routines with MLA investigations allows for documenting phase compositions during chemical and thermochemical processes. Behaviour of P-phases during treatment and type of SSA govern P-recycling capacity. Findings lend additional insight to the identification of SSA types.
                  Two different P-recovery routines have been investigated. Target phase groups (phosphates) have successfully been digested. Understanding phosphate setup in terms of composition, particle sizes and phase association is vital for an efficient P-extraction from SSA. P-recovery is not straightforward, but rather a series of steps in order to address different P-phase types. SSA is a complex secondary resource, which needs to be understood prior to P-extraction.Phosphorus is an essential, non-substitutable bulk element. As a dietary element, phosphate is fundamental due to its involvement in all metabolic processes. With an ever-growing global population, demand keeps increasing. In nature, phosphorus mostly occurs in phases where a phosphate (PO In reviewing phosphate origins in SSA ( It is evident that the current understanding of SSA mineralogy and SSA chemistry is fairly limited. SSA are a highly heterogeneous material, it varies greatly in itself and depending on its origin. No single analytical method is suited to describe the system properly. To complement previous endeavours, the application of an automated mineralogy system (Mineral Liberation Analyzer® (MLA)) was chosen. Bulk chemical (ICP-MS, XRF) and mineralogical analytical (XRD-Rietveld) methods fail to address the geometrical characteristics in heterogeneous particles. These can be studied by electron-beam based methods which combine image and in-situ chemical analytical methods, such as the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) MLA ( Two SSA originating from sewage sludge mono-combustion plants were studied. Sample one (SSA I) was kindly provided by ZVK, Neu-Ulm, Germany, sample two (SSA II) by Bonn civic council, Bonn, Germany. While SSA I is a municipal sewage sludge ash, SSA II was generated from municipal sewage combined with industrial discharge. This caused an elevated heavy metal content in the latter, beyond values permitted by German fertiliser ordnance ( Chemicals used were H Thermochemical treatment was carried out in single zone tube furnace (Ströhlein Instruments, Germany), with a heating area of 0.4 MLA measurements were conducted using an automated mineralogy system by Field Emission Inc. (FEI) consisting of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) Quanta 650 FEG hosted at the Geometallurgy Laboratory of TU Bergakademie Freiberg/Saxony. This system incorporates two coupled Bruker 129 Methods used are acid digestion, thermo-chemical treatment and MLA investigation. As phosphate is bound in water insoluble species, a mobilisation of phosphate by digestion with mineral acids is the state-of-the-art approach. This digestion can be carried out analogously to the wet-process for phosphoric acid production, wherein apatite is digested by sulfuric acid; the products obtained are mainly phosphoric acid and gypsum ( Digestion was carried out by adding 0.5 SSA II was mixed with NH A continuous inert gas flow of N Five powder samples were collected (untreated SSA I and SSA II, digested and dried SSA I residue, heated SSA II, and SSA II digested residue after thermochemical treatment). Ten gram each, sample and fine graphite, were mixed in a rotator. The graphite served as a particle separator when the particle mixture is stirred with a defined amount of epoxy resin. The mixture was filled in Teflon beakers with a diameter of 30 The beam acceleration voltage was set at 25 An initial set of EDS reference spectra was gained by the automated XBSE-STD routine. Due to intimate intergrowth of various subgrains in agglomerated particles, a considerable number of reference spectra refer to transition zones and mixture between subgrains. Although quantitative element analyses from single grains can be obtained by EDS, these compositional data do not allow for an unequivocal labelling with regular mineral names. Mineral names refer to both a defined crystal structure and related mineral chemical compositions. As the EDS only refer to the elemental compositions of the phases and occurrence of glasses can be expected in the ashes, a labelling by mineral names is not applicable. Also, the wide compositional ranges of the grains in the particles hardly allowed for assigning mineral names, even with application of the MinIdent database ( For the sorting of the numerous EDS reference spectra of phosphorus bearing phases a generic labelling was applied. Such a generic labelling has been successfully applied to complex REE-minerals bearing ores ( The GXMAP measurements were classified against the reference EDX-ray spectra list using the MLA 3.1.3 software version at a match probability of 1e The evaluation of a bulk chemical assay, recalculated from phase modes and element compositions requires the specification of formulae, element composition and density for each phase in the grouped spectra list. A generic formula which covers the major elements encountered in each group was introduced. As the densities for each of the grouped phases are difficult to evaluate, these were estimated in reference and relation to elemental compositions and known minerals with similar composition e.g. apatite (Ca When comparing the modal compositions of both samples ( Within the scope of characterising the material, particle size distributions were studied. Whereas PSD curves show distributions across the entire sample, MLA allows for evaluating particle size distribution by phase group. Thus, the grain size distribution of particles containing the target phase, P-rich phases, can be evaluated. When applying this tool, the amount of the studied phase group within the sample needs to be kept in mind. Studying particle size distributions of minor components might not yield statistically relevant results. The PSD in A unique advantage of MLA allows for the comparison of PSD curves of the entire material with PSD curves of single components without additional separation. Keeping the recycling target and potential P-extraction in mind, overall PSD is compared with PSD of the main P-containing component (P-Ca-Al-Si-phases (68.3%) in SSA I; Ca-Al-Si-P-phases (45.6%) in SSA II). SSA I shows coarser main P-phase particle size than overall PSD and SSA II finer main P-phase particles than overall PSD. Thus, in SSA I, the potential target for P extraction (P-Ca-Al-Si-phases) is found in the larger particles of the sample. However, the qualitatively relevant, highly pure P-phases (apatites) do not show such a clear behaviour. It is noted that these values might not prove statistically significant (apatites constitute <1 The material is composed of particles, which may be formed by one or more grains of different phase groups. Quantification of the locking of distinct phases is an MLA operation which provides valuable information about the degree of association of the components. While unlocked/free particles quantify the degree of liberation, locking investigates particle formation preferences of a phase with other group(s). This behaviour has a considerable influence on the efficiency of phosphate recycling. Phosphate-containing grains of SSA may be associated with other chemical components (e.g. quartz) due to the thermochemical reorganisation process in the course of incineration ( As Ca-Al-Si-P-phases (9.3 Liberated apatite grains constitute about 35.4% of the respective group. 37.8% are joined to P-Ca-Al-Si-phases, and 21.6% to P-Ca-Al-Si-phases and at least to one other phase. By and large, SSA I and SSA II follow the same pattern in phase locking: the two quantitatively most relevant P-phases lock preferably with each other. The qualitatively most relevant phase, apatites, locks predominantly with P-Ca-Al-Si-phases (59.4%) in SSA I and not as pronounced with the Ca-Al-Si-P-phases (11.0%) in SSA II. With respect to a P-recycling strategy, locking suggests the following conclusion: For SSA I, the P-Ca-Al-Si-phases ( By digestion with sulfuric acid, P-containing phases from SSA are solubilised. In As SSA consists of particulate matter composed of many different grain sizes. Studying PSD curves enables the identification of size fractions where target phases are most abundant. The PSD in When comparing locking behaviour of SSA I ( A major difficulty in recovering phosphate from SSA is the heavy metal content in some SSA. Standard procedure phosphate recovery (wet-process, using acids) mobilises heavy metals as an unwanted by-product. These are hard to extract and lead to unwanted impurities in the product. Thermochemical treatment was applied to counter these effects. Results are shown in In contrast to untreated SSA II, apatites increased substantially with thermochemical treatment (1.0–6.9 When focusing on the formerly identified three P-bearing phases, their collective share of the sample changes (81.0% SSA II; 62.6% thermochemically treated SSA II). Also, the distribution has changed. P-Ca-Al-Si-phases decreased by ∼13%, Ca-Al-Si-P-phases increased by 7% and apatites rose by 6%. A partial breakdown of P-Ca-Al-Si-phases to high P (apatites) and lower P (Ca-Al-Si-P-phases) could have occurred during thermochemical treatment. Meanwhile, Fe-P-phases were removed from SSA The sulfuric acid digestion minimises the P-containing phase groups in the residue to 13.9 The high gypsum content (Ca-Mg-Ba-sulfates) in the residue (42.5 When analysing the PSD, there is a displacement of the thermochemically treated sample against SSA II. This means that sample material consists of smaller grains after heavy metal scrubbing (d All three samples (SSA II; thermochemically treated SSA II; SSA II residue) show a uniformly graded particle size distribution curve for Ca-Al-Si-P-phases (  Apatites were liberated by about 78.5% in the untreated sample, after treatment, this value decreased to 27.2%. Keeping in mind that this step enriched the sample in apatites, and the next step depleted it almost entirely of this group, the particles generated must be relatively simple and acid-accessible. Since locking characteristics indicate complex particles, multi-phase acid-accessible particles must have been formed. The sample was depleted in phase group P-Ca-Al-Si, and locking of binary particles with Ca-Al-Si-P-phases reduced by 34.8%. This process step seems to affect mostly binary Ca-Al-Si-P/P-Ca-Al-Si-phases particles.  The situation emerged somewhat diverse for material, which underwent thermochemical treatment with NH Both apatites and P-Ca-Al-Si-phases are no longer a relevant component of the sample, locking data is not significant (4 particles apatite, 39 particles P-Ca-Al-Si-phases). The application of automated SEM Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA) to sewage sludge ashes and their residues gives a detailed insight to results of two treatment processes. Results mainly concern the characterisation of particles and their phase components in terms of modes, sizes, locking and liberation. A classification of automated spectral mapping measurement (GXMAP) against EDX spectra with a generic labelling following elemental compositions allowed to distinguish phase groups. Studied groups were apatites, P-Ca-Al-Si-phases, Ca-Al-Si-P-phases, Fe-P-phases, Fe-Si-Al-P-phases and further phases labelled as quartz or sulfates. It was possible to detect differences in primary SSA, resulting from provenance. Modal phase compositions changed during high-temperature processes. Primary SSA differ in their main components, their contamination, particle size distribution (PSD) and, due to differences in phosphate precipitation methods used, the kind of phosphate compounds present (e.g. Fe-P, etc.). These findings may serve as fingerprints for the identification of SSA styles, differing in their capacity for P-recycling. Thus, this method appears attractive for future applications in secondary raw material characterisation. For phosphate recovery, two different P-recovery routines relating to the characteristics of the primary SSA have been investigated. First, wet-process and second, wet-process following thermochemical treatment with NH The associations of investigated samples showed that Ca-Al-Si-P-phases in the thermochemically treated sample were highly liberated, locked by about 51.4% (binary and ternary+). All other associations in this study showed higher locking values. Thermochemical treatment of SSA II greatly enriched the sample in apatite (by a factor of 6.9, see These findings are essential for an efficient P-extraction from SSA. Based on overall composition, target phases (e.g. phosphate containing phases) are identified and changes in composition during chemical treatment recorded. Both quantitatively as well as qualitatively relevant P-components of SSA were investigated. Both SSA were studied with regard to their overall PSD, PSD of P-rich target phases and target phase association with other phase groups. SSA I displays a well-graded PSD (i.e. particles of all sizes are present, from smallest to largest). Ca-Al-Si-P-phases in this sample are considerably more uniformly graded (less variety in grain sizes). In SSA II, thermochemical treatment led to grain size reduction. Here, the sample is well graded while the P-containing components apatites, P-Ca-Al-Si-phases and Ca-Al-Si-P-phases are more uniformly graded (bulk of the material below 20 As SSA II illustrates, sulfates already present in the ash vanish during thermochemical treatment. In subsequent digestion, a considerable amount of sulfates is formed, as expected ( Experiments showed that iron phosphates were enriched after digestion. This is related to the low concentration of sulphuric acid used which is not sufficient to solubilise iron phosphates, as well as a relative enrichment of insoluble phases in residues in general. P-recovery is not straightforward, but rather a series of steps in order to address different P-phase types. Future endeavours aiming at P-recovery from SSA should respond to this challenge. SSA is a complex secondary resource, whose characterisation requires a consideration of its particle morphologies. Incomplete extraction of target phases is not only a result of process parameters (acid strength, mixing, residence time, etc.). It was shown that sophisticated particle types (intarsia) have pronounced effects on P-recovery. The authors wish to thank Zweckverband Steinhäule, Neu-Ulm, Germany and the City of Bonn for providing sewage sludge ash samples. Additional thank is owed to Dipl.-Geol. Sabine Haser of the Geometallurgy Laboratory at the Department of Economic Geology and Petrology, TU Freiberg, for support in MLA analyses. We thank the reviewers for helpful comments.