Indium (In) can be recycled economically from used indium tin oxide (ITO) target or ITO etching solution. This study offers an efficient and simple method for recovery of pure indium from used materials using hydrometallurgical and hot immersion processes. The hydrometallurgical method (displacement) can be used to obtain indium metal from ITO waste liquid, and a slag-making process during hot immersion is proposed to purify sponge indium above 99%. The effects of replacement agents and temperatures for replacement solution are discussed using microstructure measurements for illustration. Magnesium (Mg) has the lowest oxidation potential and can be easily removed by using either oxidization or vaporization. In contrast, tin needs to be detached from an indium plate before sponge indium can form.According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), major uses of indium include coatings (70%), electrical components and semiconductors (12%), solders and alloys (12%), and other research (6%). Coating applications include transparent conduction oxide (TCO), thin film solar cells (CIGS, copper, indium, gallium, and selenium), light filters in low pressure sodium vapor lamps, higher corrosion resistance mirrors, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Indium is also used in low-melting-temperature alloys (24In–76Ga), semiconductors (InSb and InN), control rods (80Ag–15In–5Cd) for nuclear reactors, and as a vacuum seal for cryogenics applications ITO is an n-type wide band-gap (3.3–4.3 Several methods for indium recovery have been reported. Tomii and Tsuchida The aim of this work was to devise a method of using hydrometallurgical and hot immersion processes to recover pure indium from alloy scraps. The investigation of the recovery process was conducted using energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS), scanning electron microscope (SEM) and optical microscope (OM) images and thermodynamic calculations. In this work, we employed methods from hydrometallurgical and hot immersion processes to recover pure indium from used materials. The high recovery efficiency, simple operating steps, and low cost of equipment required for this process make it suitable for industry-scale production. ITO target scraps were first leached in 30 To measure the purity and microstructure of the In metal, the recovered In was electro-polished in electrolyte containing 66 Indium can be recovered by dissolving ITO target or film in an acid solution and replacing the indium with Zn, Al, or Mg. Indium can ionize to ions or form compounds when the potential exceeds the over-potential in the electrochemical system. In an acid solution, indium easily ionizes In A curve showing the ion concentration-oxidation potential relationship between elements is shown in The SEM image in The thermodynamic calculation equations are shown in  Magnesium particles were used to reduce retention in the bulk indium. The results show that our process can obtain 61.4 Indium can be recovered from an acidic solution of ITO scrap using simple hydrometallurgical and hot immersion techniques. Sponge indium is first formed from an acid solution by using zinc or magnesium as replacement agents. This process can obtain 96% pure indium (i.e., 4 Part of this study was supported by grants from the National Science Council, Taiwan (NSC 97-2218-E-239-005).