Ionic conductivity of highly deproteinized natural rubber having various amount of epoxy group (LEDPNR) mixed with lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) salt was investigated through impedance analysis with respect to salt concentration, glass transition temperature and epoxy group content. The LEDPNR was prepared from depolymerization of epoxidized natural rubber (ENR) latex, which was prepared by deproteinization of natural rubber latex with proteolytic enzyme and surfactant followed by epoxidation with fresh peracetic acid. The resulting LEDPNR was found to have 10–57 mol% epoxy group, low M
                     n and low T
                     g. The conductivity of LEDPNR/LiTFSI mixture was dependent on LiTFSI salt concentration and glass transition temperature (T
                     g). The highest ionic conductivity versus salt concentration for the mixtures was found to be due to amount of effective carrier ion and the highest mobility of segment of LEDPNR at a suitable LiTFSI concentration. The ionic conductivity of LEDPNR/LiTFSI mixtures was further dependent on epoxy group content.Deproteinized natural rubber (DPNR) having epoxy group is an important polymer electrolyte useful for fabrication of ionics devices such as polymer battery. This may be because it provides an effective conduction path of carrier ions, i.e. Li In previous works In our previous works In the present work, the ionic conductivity of LEDPNR with various epoxy group contents mixed with LiTFSI salt was investigated by impedance analysis to optimize the amount of ion for the rubbery electrolyte. A change in ionic conductivity was associated with salt concentration, The rubber latex used in this study was high ammonia natural rubber (NR) latex. Deproteinization of the rubber was made by incubation of the latex with 0.04 wt.% proteolytic enzyme (KP-3939, KaO), and 1 wt.% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for 24 h at 311 K followed by centrifugation. The cream fraction was redispersed into 1 wt.% SDS solution and washed twice by centrifugation. DPNR, pre-cooled at 278 K, was epoxidized in the latex stage with freshly prepared peracetic acid for 4 h at pH 5–6. After completion of the reaction, pH of the solution was adjusted to 7.1. Depolymerization of the epoxidized rubber was carried out by incubation of the latex with ammonium persulfate ((NH4) The LEDPNR was mixed with salts to prepare polymer-salt electrolyte film. The salts used in the present study were lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI). The rubbers after drying for at least a week were dissolved in dried tetrahydrofuran, THF. The solution was mixed with the salts followed by casting onto Teflon sheets to prepare film specimens for the measurement of ionic conductivity. The resulting film was dried under reduced pressure at 323 K for 24 h. Measurements of molecular weight and molecular weight distribution of the rubber were made by a TOSOH size exclusion chromatography, consisting of a TOSOH CCPD pump, a RI-8012 Differential Refractometer and a UV-8011 UV detector. The measurement was made at room temperature and the flow rate of the mobile phase, THF, was 0.5 ml/min. The molecular weights were estimated on the basis of the molecular weight of standard polystyrene.  DSC measurement was made with a Seiko Instrument DSC 220 differential scanning calorimeter over the temperature range of 153 K to 373 K at the heating rate of 10 K/min. Rubber samples of about 10 mg were encapsulated in an aluminium pan. The midpoint temperature was used as the The ionic conductivity was measured by the complex impedance method using an impedance analyzer (Solartron model 1260; Schlumberger) with temperature range of 333–283 K    The resulting LEDPNR was subjected to impedance analysis after mixing with LiTFSI salt. A typical cole–cole plot for a mixture of LEDPNR45 with LiTFSI 20 wt.% is shown in To clarify effect of the salt concentration on ionic conductivity in the rubber, a plot of the To investigate the constraint of the segmental motion, the The effect of At 20 wt.% LiTFSI, thus, a plot of the The change in the The ionic conductivity of LEPDNR/LiTFSI was dependent on salt concentration, This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid (12416) for the Development of Innovation and the 21st Century COE Program for Scientific Research from The ministry of Education, Science and Culture Japan. One of the authors (W. Klinklai) acknowledges the financial support by The Thailand Research Fund (TRF) (Research Fellowships for New Scholar, MRG4880064).