We present theory and simulation of a mid-infrared (λ
                     =3.2μm) chalcogenide waveguide monolithically integrated with an evanescently coupled PbTe photodetector for lab-on-a-chip sensing applications. A spacer layer is used to modify effective index of the structure, enabling a waveguide-detector mode to propagate in the chalcogenide waveguide and be absorbed in the PbTe detector. The relation between quantum efficiency and detector dimensions is analyzed showing that the design geometry can be optimized to maximize signal to noise ratio. In addition, the location of metal contacts is optimized to minimize loss while maintaining good device performance. The design is compatible with standard planar lithographic processing and its flexibility suggests multiple applications in the fields of biological and chemical sensing.IR spectroscopy for the identification of biological and chemical agents is usually performed in the “fingerprint” midwave-infrared (MWIR) bands from 3 to 5 Although there have been successful demonstrations of mid- and far-IR transmission and sensing with III–V waveguides (GaAs/AlGaAs) Broadband infrared (IR) detectors such as those based on HgCdTe have been extensively used in IR spectroscopy Our integrated sensor approach uses vertical evanescent coupling from ChG waveguides (As  Prior work has studied the responsivity of thermally evaporated polycrystalline PbTe thin films. The photoresponsivity of polycrystalline PbTe was optimized by measuring thin films of different thicknesses both, at room temperature and at thermoelectrically cooled temperatures (−60 Detector optimization requires that we examine the physics underpinning the signal to noise ratio. The change in voltage in the illuminated portion of the photoconductor with an applied current bias is given by: Our PbTe photoconductive films show no change in mobility with illumination therefore the barrier modulation contribution Defining the responsivity ℜ as the change in voltage over the incident light power (V/W) and setting From Eq. For the structure shown in   These results can be inserted into Eq. The length of the detector (distance between electrical contacts) also affects the SNR. Eq. The choice of an appropriate spacer layer material is contingent on it meeting the primary requirements of transparency in the wavelength range of interest and relatively low refractive index. Ease of deposition should also be a consideration so that integrity of the lower waveguide layer remains intact. With these considerations in mind, polymer materials that can be spin-coated may prove to be good choices in some wavelength ranges. However, most polymers have a backbone comprised of C In summary, we have demonstrated a novel design that integrates PbTe detectors with ChG waveguides for on chip mid-IR detection. Our simulations show that the use of a spacer layer leads to a well distributed field along the width of the detector, and that the quantum efficiency of the detector increases as the detector becomes wider. We see that thicker films lead to higher quantum efficiency up to a point but eventually changes in the effective index reduce the quantum efficiency. We have also derived a FoM for the SNR of our evanescently coupled detectors and after factoring in the non-uniformity of the field, shown that narrower detectors yield a higher FoM. We believe that such an integrated sensor design will enable the creation and deployment of low-cost remote sensor arrays with small footprints. Funding for this work has been provided by the