Shale gas has played an increasingly important role in world energy supply in recent years. The gas transport process in the shale matrix is particularly important as it affects the long-term production behavior of shale gas. The shale matrix consists of inorganic minerals and embedded organic matter with mass transfer influenced by mechanical interactions. We develop a micro-scale discrete coupled model to explicitly account for mass transfer and mechanical interactions, and how these interactions affect the gas transport characteristics of both components. Specifically, the model comprises organic matter embedded within inorganic minerals. The proposed model is implemented and solved within the framework of COMSOL Multiphysics (Version 5.4). The model is first verified against the results of a desorption-diffusion-seepage coupled experiment and then extended to field scale. It is found that the impacts of gas pressure and effective strain are different for the gas seepage in inorganic minerals and gas diffusion in organic matter. Gas pressure may enhance the permeability of the inorganic phase due to the gas slippage effect while compactive effective strain decreases permeability during the gas depletion process. For gas diffusion in the organic matter, surface diffusion decreases and effective diffusion coefficient increases with declining gas pressure. While the impacts of effective strain on the effective diffusion are dependent on the external boundary conditions, the effective diffusion coefficient is lower than the initial value under constant stress conditions and larger than the initial value under constant volume conditions. The proposed model provides a complementary method to conventional continuum dual-media approaches and provides a clear understanding of the interactions between the two components. Field-observed oscillatory gas production data is readily history-matched and key mechanisms explained with the proposed approach presented in this work.Unconventional resources, especially shale gas, play an increasingly indispensable role in current energy supply due to its huge reserves and increasing production ( Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) ( Besides the heterogeneity of the gas flow behavior, the heterogeneous distribution of mechanical properties in the shale matrix is also important. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and its PeakForce Quantitative Nano-mechanical Mapping (Peak-Force QNM™) mode provide a convenient way to calculate Young's modulus of different components in the shale matrix at nano-scale. AFM was used to map the mechanical properties of organic and inorganic components ( Multi-porosity models are widely applied for the gas flow simulation, including the original dual-porosity/dual-permeability (DP/DK) model ( Previous studies have shown that the shale matrix contains inorganic minerals and embedded organic matter ( The development of horizontal drilling and multi-stage hydraulic fracturing technologies have first enabled and then enhanced gas production from shale reservoirs. During the fracturing process, hydraulic fluid, proppants, and activators are injected into the shale reservoir. The proppants maintain the fracture open to enhance gas production during the gas depletion process ( As shown in The gas depletion process of adsorbed gas (CH Similarly, the gas depletion process of adsorbed gas (CH Based on thermodynamics and poroelasticity theory, the governing equation of the mechanical deformation is obtained as ( The adsorption stress If the chemical potential at time From the preceding, the mechanical equations for the inorganic minerals and organic matter can be obtained as ( The gas flow regime in the inorganic minerals is significantly different from that in conventional reservoirs because of the smaller pore diameter and the invalidity of the continuity assumption ( Following gas depletion, the gas contained in the organic matter diffuses into the inorganic pores driven by the concentration difference, although which diffusion term as the dominant mechanism remains debatable ( Diffusion in porous media can be categorized as bulk flow, Knudsen flow, and transition flow ( For adsorbed gas, the gas molecules are driven by the chemical gradient of the adsorbed phase and flow along the wall surface. This flow regime represents one of surface diffusion ( The porosity of the inorganic mineral is related to the effective strain ( The global strain of the mineral matrix is the resultant of the volumetric strain ( The local strain of the inorganic mineral is applied as the compressive strain of the gas pressure itself (also called pressure strain in this work): A typical relationship between porosity and permeability is the cubic law ( Similarly, the porosity of the organic matter is related to the effective strain: The global strain of the organic matter is the combination of the volume strain of the organic matter ( The local strain of the organic matter contains the adsorptive strain ( In this section, the fully coupled model described above is applied to history match experimental data ( For the geometry of the simulation model, we assume that the natural fractures are located at the infinity and surround the representative unit. In such condition, the influences of the outer mechanical boundary and gas flow boundary are uniform equidistant to the points with the same distance to the center of the representative unit (REV). Based on that assumption, a spherical geometry is selected for both components as shown in To represent the constant stress condition, the outer boundaries are free to deform under invariant confining stress as shown in  As observed in The contributions of different components to the gas flow rate are also illustrated in In this section, the models established in Section As shown in As shown in The permeability evolution of the inorganic minerals under the contrasting boundary conditions are studied. The results are illustrated in Changes in effective strain under the constant stress condition are discussed, and their impacts on the effective diffusion coefficient are investigated.  Superposing the three influencing factors, the behavior of the effective diffusion coefficient evolves through three stages: (1) Diffusion Coefficient Decrease. Diffusion coefficient decreases immediately following gas depletion due to the compressive global strain applied by the outer boundary; (2) Diffusion Coefficient Increases. Diffusion coefficient increases after the gas pressure in the inorganic minerals reaches the minimum value. As the gas in the inorganic minerals flows out, the organic matter swells. Also, the gas desorption in the organic matter enlarges the porosity; (3) Diffusion Coefficient Recovery. In the final stage, the gas in the organic matter fully depletes and the pores in the organic matter are compressed according to the effective stress principle. The timing and appearance of the three stages are determined by the values of the various coefficients and their related time of action. The impacts of Young's modulus of each inorganic and organic component are investigated as shown in The compressive global strain and the strain resulting from the gas pressure have little impact for the high Young's modulus and the adsorptive strain is dominant. For the cases with low Young's modulus, both strains are dominant while the impact of gas adsorption can be ignored. This indicates that for the REV with high Young's modulus the evolution of effective diffusion coefficient is mainly determined by the internal response, while for the case with low Young's modulus the outer boundary has a significant impact. As illustrated above, the decreased adsorptive strain increases the effective diffusion coefficient. For simplicity, we define the adsorptive strain constant as The evolution of the effective diffusion coefficient and the contributions of different mechanisms under the constant volume condition are illustrated in Three stages of behavior are observed: (1) Diffusion Coefficient Increase. The gas pressure in the inorganic pores acts as a confining pressure on the organic matter. Thus, the diffusion coefficient increases because of the decreased gas pressure in the inorganic pores; (2) Diffusion Coefficient Decrease. In this stage, the diffusion coefficient decreases due to the decreased gas pressure in the organic matter. As the gas pressure declines, the pores shrink and the organic matter is compressed; (3) Diffusion Coefficient Recovery. In this stage, the gas desorption increases the porosity in the organic matter.  Where the organic matter has a high stiffness ( Similar to the constant stress condition, a high gas adsorptive strain increases the diffusion coefficient as illustrated in We have proposed a discrete embedded small-scale model as a component REV to evaluate the interactions between inorganic minerals and organic matter. There are three approaches to upscale our small component REV model to large scale. As noted previously, conventional DP/DK models ( In the model verification process of this work, a major assumption is that the shale sample comprises only inorganic mineral and organic matter components with no visible fractures – the role of fractures is ignored. Also, the dimensionless time and dimensionless gas rate are used to define the scale effect. A similar approach can also be applied to the field, as the gas stored in the shale matrix serves as the main contributor to long-term gas production behavior. The experimental data first exhibit a decrease and then increase, exhibiting a brief oscillation. This similar trend is also observed in the field data such as the data of Barnett well 3 ( Besides the ultra-low permeability and porosity, the gas shale reservoir also exhibits high permeability anisotropy -the permeability is directional and the permeability in the horizontal direction is much higher than that in the vertical direction. This anisotropy is one of the key factors in controlling gas flow and gas production rates. As discussed above, the mechanical condition in the horizontal direction can be assumed as the constant volume condition with a constant stress condition in the vertical direction. The permeability in one specific direction is defined as the function of the fracture aperture change in the other directions ( The previous presents a micro-scale discrete coupled model to investigate the coupling between mechanical deformation and flow characteristics in the shale matrix. In the model, the two sub-systems of the shale matrix (inorganic minerals and organic matter) are explicitly defined and the mass transfer and mechanical interaction between them are calculated in an explicit way. Results from a coupled desorption-diffusion-seepage experiment are used to validate the numerical modeling results. Methods of upscaling of the discrete small-scale model are also introduced in the work. The proposed model gives a complementary alternative to the conventional continuous dual-media approach whereby the organic components are physically nested and embedded within an exterior of mineral matter. This model is applied to history match filed data, and in particular to provide a mechanism for the oscillatory gas production data at early time, typically observed in field data. The main conclusions are summarized below: The impacts of gas pressure on the gas flow characteristics are monotonic. A decline in gas pressure increases the permeability of the inorganic material due to the gas slippage effect. For diffusion in the organic matter, the effective diffusion coefficient increases with a decrease in gas pressure while the surface diffusion coefficient decreases; The impact of the mechanical deformation on the gas flow characteristics are dynamic and depend on the outer boundary condition and the mechanical interaction between inorganic minerals and organic matter. The intrinsic permeability of the inorganic minerals decreases despite the outer boundary condition. For effective diffusion in the organic matter, the effective diffusion coefficient increases under the constant volume condition and decreases under the constant stress condition, relative to the initial equilibrium magnitude. The impacts of the elastic modulus and gas adsorptive strain are also investigated. For the case with a high elastic modulus, the impact of the outer boundary can be ignored, and the interior response controls the evolution of transport characteristics of both components. For the case with a low adsorptive strain, the impacts of adsorption strain can be functionally ignored. This work is a partial result of funding by the The mass conservation law in the inorganic minerals is: The modified Darcy flow is applied to calculate the velocity: B.1 Bulk Diffusion and Knudsen Diffusion The mass conservation law in the organic matter is: As mentioned above, the mass flux ( Considering the effect of porosity, tortuosity, and the roughness, Eq. For the single pure gas with self-diffusion, the bulk diffusion coefficient can be obtained from the molecules kinetic theory and is written as ( Considering the effect of porosity and tortuosity, Eq. B.2 Effective Diffusion Coefficient   Another method combining the bulk diffusion and Knudsen diffusion is the application of probability function which is proposed to calculate the proportion of molecular-molecular or molecular-wall collision in total gas collisions ( In 1962, The effective diffusion coefficient becomes: B.3 Surface Diffusion Surface diffusion is caused by the chemical potential gradient of the adsorption phase which related to the gas pressure and temperature. In this work, only the isothermal condition is considered. Based on the Langmuir adsorption theory, the amount of adsorbed gas can be written as: The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at