Barite is the only barium mineral used in the production of BaSO4 of various purities. Barite is not only produced from primary barite deposits, where barite is the primary mineral but there is a growing trend in processing the ores that contain barite in the form of gangue or as the secondary mineral. Deposits having barite is the primary mineral contain barite in a coarsely crystalline form. It has more or less an intergrown appearance when associated with other ores and minerals.Introduction Barite ore deposits Beneficiation of barite ores Synopsis Beneficiation of barite ores using physical concentration method Beneficiation of barite ore that contains fluorspar and silica gangue minerals Research and development Collector choice Modifying reagents Activating reagents Specification for commercial barite products References This chapter deals with beneficiation of barite using the flotation method. Barite (or barytes meaning “heavy spar”) has an application as a weighting agent in the paper industry, paints, etc., and also for oil well drilling mud. Production of barite dates back to the early 1930s, when only high-grade barite was mined (i.e., over 80% BaSO Nowadays, a number of barite producers use flotation to recover barite from tailing dumps and complex ore that contains silica, fluorspar, calcite, celestite, and other impurities. Barite is the only barium mineral used in the production of BaSO Mineralogically, barite is characterized by a rombic holohedral crystal system like other sulfides. The microstructure of BaSO There are varieties of barite deposits from which barite is produced worldwide.    During the past 30 The physical concentration method for recovery of barite is used with the ore that contains silicates, calcite, and iron as the principal gangue minerals. In the early 1960s, a number of operating plants used a combination of gravity concentration and magnetic separation. A generalized flow sheet is presented in Using this flow sheet, a pharmaceutical grade of barium sulfate was produced assaying 97.5% BaSO Gravity concentrate produced was iron-stained. The concentrate was then leached using muriatic acid to remove iron. Another treatment process involving a combination of gravity and flotation is shown in Flotation was carried out using fatty acid at pH 8.5–9.0. There is little information on flotation of barite from the ores that contain fluorspar. Barite fluorspar ore usually contains other variable minerals such as REO. Known deposits are located in Vietnam and Canada. Two possible methods of beneficiation Sequential flotation of fluorspar–barite. This testwork includes depression of barite using dextrin and quebracho and flotation of fluorspar ahead of barite. The conditions and results using this method are summarized in Although reasonably good CaF When floating barite ahead of fluorspar, fluorspar does not float using a barite collector, which is the main attributing factor in achieving good selectivity. A complex barite, fluorspar, rare earth oxide ore was treated to recover REO contained in a bastneasite and monazite mixture. Selective flotation of REO in the presence of barite fluorite was poor. Also barite recovery was poor when using either sulfonate or fatty acid collector. In this research work a new highly efficient barite collector was developed. A new collector SR82 is composed of the mixture of petroleum sulfonate (R825), succinamate (R845), and alkyl sulfate in a ratio of 2:2:1. The effect of a new collector on barite grade recovery using complex BaSO The metallurgical results obtained in a continuous test are shown in These data have demonstrated that the new collector is a highly effective barite collector. A large portion of development testwork was performed on complex barite containing ores mainly from secondary sources derived from base metal and sulfide ores that contain barite. Studies were also conducted on the ores that contain fluorspar, albite, and mica minerals. A fair amount of research work was devoted to examination of various fatty acids In an extensive research conducted during the 1980s, a series of different collectors were examined The collector type is tested and the metallurgical results are presented in In these tests pH was maintained at 8.5 with sodium carbonate. The depressant used was sodium silicate at 900 From the data generated, succinamate collectors and a new collector mixture RS82 gave the best metallurgical results. The new RS82 collector was tested on several sulfide tailings. The results obtained are shown in From the data generated it has been demonstrated that the new collector mixture gave excellent barite metallurgical results. The modifying reagents normally used during barite flotation are listed in   The effect of sodium silicate on barite flotation using different collectors is illustrated in    Good depression of fluorspar was achieved with the addition of citric acid above 500    Another barite depressant is FeCl In the research studies a number of barite activating inorganic agents were examined NaCl and MgCl BaCl The effect of BaCl In these experiments, collector R845 (succinamate) was used. In the operating plants BaCl The barite market is divided into three different product grades as (1) drilling mud, (2) chemical grade, and (3) filler grade. Typical specification of these products is shown in A specific requirement is the product having an SrSO