A small addition (≤0.5wt%) of cerium silicide (CeSi2) to powder metallurgy (PM) commercially pure Ti (CP-Ti), Ti–6Al–4V and Ti–10V–2Fe–3Al (all in wt%) results in substantial microstructural refinement and noticeably improved ductility with marginally improved sintered density. CeSi2 is unstable and decomposes between 1423K and 1473K. The Si goes into solid solution in β-Ti and is responsible for the improved sintered density while the Ce scavenges both oxygen (O) and chlorine (Cl) from the Ti powder and therefore improves tensile ductility. The resulting CeO2 and CeCl
                        x
                     O
                        y
                      particles generally exist along or close to the prior-β grain boundaries. The substantial microstructural refinement in terms of both the prior-β grain size and the subsequent α-Ti lath size is attributed to the grain boundary pinning effect of the CeO2 particles. The optimum concentration of CeSi2 is approximately 0.5wt%, beyond which both the sintered density and tensile elongation drop with increasing addition of CeSi2. CeSi2 can be a practical form of Ce addition to PM Ti alloys for impurity scavenging, microstructural refinement and tensile ductility improvement.Powder metallurgy (PM) offers the potential for cost-effective fabrication of titanium (Ti) components for a wide range of applications The Ellingham diagram The use of Al–Nd master alloy powder is not suited to low Al content or Al-free PM Ti alloys. RE boride powder is a useful form of RE addition but the simultaneous introduction of B, even at a small amount (≤0.3 Cerium silicide (CeSi This paper investigates the effect of a small addition of CeSi HDH Ti powder (99.5% purity, 0.25%O, 0.05%Cl, −250 mesh), supplied by Kimet, China, and two master alloy powders, 66.7V–13.3Fe–20Al (in wt%, 99.5% purity, −325 mesh) and 58V–42Al (in wt%, 99.5% purity, −325 mesh), supplied by Baoji Jia Cheng Rare Metal Materials Co. Ltd., China, were used. Aluminum powder (99.7% purity, ∼3 Sintering was conducted at 1623     CeSi Ti–1.0CeSi  A closer inspection of the as-sintered microstructures of CP-Ti and CP-Ti–0.5CeSi  Previous studies have indicated that RE additions do not normally enhance the sintering of PM Ti alloys, with the exception of LaH The solubility of Ce in oxygen-free β-Ti at 1623 CeSi An addition of Si can refine the microstructure of a PM alloy when stable titanium silicides form along the grain boundary The tensile strength of a titanium alloy is sensitive to its oxygen content in solid solution. Due to the formation of CeO  CeSi The addition of CeSi The stable CeO The small improvement in the sintered density by an addition of ≤0.5 The optimum addition level of CeSi This work was funded by the