Cold spraying of dissimilar materials have been addressed to understand the role of deposition sequence on the characteristics of the coating/substrate interface. Nickel and titanium coatings were sprayed onto the substrates of the opposite material under different conditions. The samples were subsequently heat treated, to better reveal the quality of metallic bonding at different locations, and examined by mechanical testing and microstructural analysis. The results show that the bonding characteristics of the Ni(coating)/Ti(substrate) pairs are significantly different from those of the Ti(coating)/Ni(substrate) pairs. Mechanical interlocking and intermixing instabilities were observed only at the interfaces of the Ni/Ti pairs, which also showed a more uniform and higher fraction of intermetallics compared to the Ti/Ni pairs in similar spraying conditions. This was attributed to higher degrees of particle/substrate deformation in the Ni/Ti pair. Also, the bond strength of the Ni/Ti pair appeared to be almost three folds of the Ti/Ni pair (64.31 MPa vs. 22.8 MPa). These findings are considered to have implications in cold-spray additive manufacturing of hybrid components or bimetals.Cold spraying (CS) is a powder consolidating technique for which powder particles are accelerated to high velocities (300–1200 m/s) by expanding a pressurized inert gas through a converging-diverging nozzle [ Schmidt et al. [ The bond strength is also considered to be influenced by different interlocking mechanisms [ CS of dissimilar (particle/substrate) pairs introduces added complexity to the bonding mechanism analysis due to the differences in thermal and physical properties of the materials. According to their relative stiffness, hardness, and yield strength, CS of dissimilar pairs has been classified into soft/hard and hard/soft cases. Bae et al. [ Post-spray heat treatment (PSHT) of dissimilar pairs has been performed with different objectives. In some studies, PSHT for promoting interfacial intermetallic growth has been employed for metallurgical bonding assessment of CS deposits. Price et al. [ In the previous work [ Ni Single impact studies provide useful information on sprayability and deformation behaviour of individual particle/substrate pairs, but other factors incorporate in the deposition of coatings. Single particles generally are sprayed at low feeding rate and high traversing speed on a polished surface [ Additionally, in single impact studies, the effect of a previous layer of coating (which is of importance especially in dissimilar pairs), peening effect of successive particle impacts and the effect of substrate surface roughness on coating deposition are not taken into account. This study aims at investigating (beyond the simple single impact process) the CS processing of Ni/Ti and Ti/Ni systems, their respective bonding features and the potential production of Ni Two spherical gas atomized Ni powders (CP-Ni, Atlantic Equipment Engineers, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA) with two different particle size distribution (referred to as Ni-1 and Ni-2) and a spherical gas atomized Ti powder (CP-Ti, Advanced Powder and Coatings, Boisbriand, Canada) were used as feedstock materials. The nickel and titanium coatings were sprayed respectively onto 25.4 mm × 80 mm × 15 mm flat substrates of Cp-Ti Grade 2 (ASTM B265) and Ni-200 (ASTM B162). Substrates for adhesion evaluation were machined into 25.4-mm-diameter cylinders in compliance with the ASTM C-633 adhesion strength standard. All substrates were ground, cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of ethanol and were dried using compressed air prior to the cold spraying. A digital optical microscope (VHX-2000 Keyence Corporation, Osaka, Japan) was used to generate a 3D profile of the four substrate surfaces (before coating deposition). The surface roughness was then calculated by analyzing the depth profiles through MATLAB which were in the range of 1.5 μm for all four substrates. CS coatings were produced using the commercially available EP Series SST Cold Spray System (Centerline (Windsor) Ltd., Windsor, Ontario, Canada). Details of the spray system can be found elsewhere [ Three samples of Ni-2 coating onto CP-Ti (Grade 2) and N For intermetallics growth assessment, test samples were heat treated for 5 and 180 min at 700 Microhardness values of as-sprayed coatings were obtained using a Duramin-1 (Struers Inc., Cleveland, OH, USA) microhardness tester equipped with a Vickers indenter with a load of HV The morphology of Ni-1, Ni-2 and Ti feedstock powders are shown in Cross-sectional SEM images of Ni-1, Ni-2, N Rough interfaces generally have been observed in a hard/soft pair of dissimilar pairs and explained by physical trapping of hard particles in soft substrates. In the current dissimilar pair, the Ti substrate underneath of Ni coatings presents a rough interface where Ti is the hard part of the dissimilar pair (171 HV The interface morphology of both Ti coatings was similar to interface observations of single particle penetrations into Ni substrate ( It has been shown by laser measurements that for similar spraying conditions particles of Ni-2 and N The interface of Ni-1 coating presents a regular wave appearance with an amplitude (the distance between peaks and valleys) of about 5 μm while the Ni-2 coating has random wavy shape with an amplitude of about 20 μm. The amplitudes of the wavy interfaces of both coatings are respectively in the range of the mean particle size of the corresponding feedstock powders. The intermixing spots are more prevailing at the interface of Ni-1 coating than at the interface of Ni-2 coating. Considering the fact that high-density material like copper have lower optimal particle size (reported to be 6 μm [ Considering this point combined with the fact that there is almost no overlap between the particle size distributions of the two Ni powders ( Considering the fact that the intermixing phenomena and wavy interface were not observed for N Then, it can be stated that deposition efficiency and impact velocity, as well as relative density [  The extent of particles plastic deformation upon impact was evaluated by microhardness measurements. Ni-1 coating with a microhardness value of 326 ± 8 HV The microhardness of both titanium deposits (185 ± 15 and 199 ± 13 HV SEM images of as sprayed and heat treated Ni-2 coating are shown in BSE images of the four coatings after being heat treated at 700 ̊C for 5 and 180 min are respectively presented in the left and right column of Close-up images of Comparing the thickness of the three intermetallics at the interface areas of all four coatings, NiTi phase formed the thickest layer of IIMCs, nonetheless the fact that Both Ni-1 and He Considering the asymmetrical pairs of Ni-2 and N The growth of IIMCs is accompanied by the formation of micropores at the Ni/Ni The influence of layer by layer fabrication deposition sequence of Ni/Ti was examined by spraying Ni-2 coatings on bulk and cold-sprayed N The thick and continuous layers of IIMCs observed in Ni-2 coating suggested the most uniform and relatively best interfacial bonding features among all four coatings. The N Bond strength values of the Ni-2 and N As shown in The bond strength values of cold sprayed Ni/Ti and Ti/Ni pairs are not reported in the literature at present. In comparison to the bond strength values of Al/Cu pair that is significantly lower than that for Cu/Al pair (1.1 MPa vs 57.4 MPa) [ The SEM images of fracture surfaces resulting from the bond strength tests are shown in The magnified SE image of the nickel substrate ( The close-up view of the fracture surface of the titanium substrate ( The coating side of the fracture surface of N Ni-2 coating compared with He The well-bonded Ni-2 coating has a thick and continuous layer of Ni The bond strength analyses and interface morphologies of as-sprayed and heat-treated samples ( The bonding phenomena of cold sprayed titanium onto nickel substrate and nickel onto titanium substrate have been studied experimentally. Two coatings were sprayed for each pair respectively with two Ni powders for the Ni/Ti pair and with two process gases (N Ni/Ti coatings showed wavy interfaces with mechanical interlocking and intermixing instabilities with the wave amplitude in the range of mean particle size while both Ti coatings presented interface roughness similar to single particle impact penetration. The wavy and rough appearance of Ni/Ti interfaces was found to be intensified by the successive impact of Ni particles as particle deformation was dominant over substrate deformation at single impact experiments of Ni particles. Higher areas exhibiting metallurgical bonding were achieved for the Ni/Ti pair (Ni-2 coating) compared to the Ti/Ni pair (N Higher bond strength values were achieved for Ni-2 coating compared with those of N Interfacial intermetallic growth morphology is strongly influenced by the bonding state of the coatings. Well-bonded coating of each pair showed more uniform and continuous intermetallics layer including Ni Cold spraying of Ni