A method is given to predict the steam penetration depth under an incidental Steam Generator Tube Rupture (SGTR) accident. Several similar experiments were performed by injecting gas into water to simulate the steam jetting into liquid Lead Bismuth Eutectic (LBE). The steam penetration behaviors including flow regimes and cavity phenomena were captured by visualization method and a semi-empirical correlation was modified for the penetration depth based on dimensional analysis and experimental data. The results showed that the penetration depth was proportional to the density ratio of gas jet to liquid coolant, gas velocity, and break size of tube. Further predictions with similarity theory have been conducted. The penetration depth was about 0.7 m during a large break (a double-ended break) of one SG cooling tubes under a postulated SGTR accident of lead-based reactor.Due to its good neutronic, thermal-hydraulic and chemical stability characteristics, Lead Bismuth Eutectic (LBE) has been proposed as the primary candidate coolant material for lead-based reactor and Accelerator Driven subcritical System (ADS), which play a significant role in safety, economics and sustainability of nuclear system ( The pool-type configuration of lead-based reactor usually adopts Steam Generators (SGs) or primary Heat Exchangers (HXs) placed inside the primary pool ( The common characteristic of the phenomenon in SGTR is intense steam-liquid metal interactions, which occurs in regimes not studied previously. Due to the opaqueness of liquid LBE, flow visualization is limited to observing the motions of the steam bubbles. Several experimental studies on penetration behaviors in transparent fluid had been carried out. The penetration depth of the gas jet injection into water was estimated as a mean value of the depth of the leading edge because slight oscillations were observed after establishing complete steady-state jet. The experimental resulsts from the previous study ( There are five variables in equation The schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is shown in Experiments were performed by varying the gas velocity from 20 to 100 m/s at ambient temperature. The nozzle inner diameter 4 mm, 6 mm, 8 mm and 10 mm respectively are selected. The depth of nozzle submerged water level is about 5 mm to prevent air entrainment. High-speed video camera is used to photograph the interaction behaviors when the air impinged into the water. It is possible to record frame rate at 100755 fps with this system. In the present tests, the resolution of 624 × 800 pixel and frame rate of 4786 fps were used. The penetration depth is the average value derived from more than 10 images at the stable state. The selected experimental velocity range covers the leak-before break to double-ended break of one SG cooling tubes condition. The nozzle diameter and the gas injection velocity were the test variables. The experimental conditions are summarized in A typical sequence of bubble movement track images using high speed photography at a frame rate of 4786 fps is shown in  As shown in The effects of the nozzle diameter on the penetration depth are shown in The experimental results on bubble penetration depth are shown in  It was found from the theoretical analysis and experimental results that the expression of penetration depth depends on the Froude number and the density ratio of gas jet to liquid coolant. When the range of Froude number was from 10  In order to estimate the penetration depth of steam jet in liquid metal under an incidental SGTR accident for lead-based reactor, this semi-empirical correlation (13) has been used based on the theory of similarity. The jet fluid is high pressure water and the coolant is liquid metal under the original break accident. The physical properties of prototype test fluids are show in  Slight verification of the semi-empirical correlation Eq. As part of basic research on the steam penetration depth characteristics of two-phase mixture under SGTR accident of lead-based reactor, a similar experimental test has been performed by injecting gas into water. A semi-empirical correlation for penetration depth obtained by model test was deduced to prototype conditions to predict the penetration depth of real conditions. The experimental results are summarized as follows: Gas liquid two-phase severe admixture was occurred and a jet cavity was observed under the present experiments. At the bottom of the cavity, the jet bubble broke up into lots of tiny bubbles and turned into float upward. The maximum penetration depth is limited by the buoyancy for the present experiments. The semi-empirical correlation of steam penetration depth with the Froude number ranging approximately from 10 The semi-empirical correlation of penetration depth obtained by model experiment was deduced to prototype conditions. It was about 0.7 m during a double-ended break (4 MPa) of one SG cooling tubes under a postulated SGTR accident, which is less than the circulation height (∼2 m) of the lead-based reactor. It can be concluded that no steam is dragged into the core under preliminary experimental results and theoretical analysis. However, it is essential that verification of the semi-empirical correlation and accurate extrapolation would be proposed in the future work. This work was supported by