In this research work, a comparative evaluation on the mechanical and microstructural characteristics of aluminium based single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites was carried out. The manufacture of a single reinforced nanocomposite was conducted with the distribution of 2wt.% nano alumina particles (avg. particle size 30–50nm) in the molten aluminium alloy of grade AA 7075; while the hybrid reinforced nanocomposites were produced with of 4wt.% silicon carbide (avg. particle size 5–10µm) and 2wt.%, 4wt.% nano alumina particles. Three numbers of single reinforced nanocomposites were manufactured through stir casting with reinforcements preheated to different temperatures viz. 400°C, 500°C, and 600°C. The stir cast procedure was extended to fabricate two hybrid reinforced nanocomposites with reinforcements preheated to 500°C prior to their inclusion. A single reinforced nanocomposite was also developed by squeeze casting with a pressure of 101MPa. Mechanical and physical properties such as density, hardness, ultimate tensile strength, and impact strength were evaluated on all the developed composites. The microstructural observation was carried out using optical and scanning electron microscopy. On comparison with base alloy, an improvement of 63.7% and 81.1% in brinell hardness was observed for single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites respectively. About 16% higher ultimate tensile strength was noticed with the squeeze cast single reinforced nanocomposite over the stir cast.Aluminium metal matrix composite (AMMC) is being preferred for numerous engineering applications like aerospace, marine, automobile and mineral processing due to their lightness associated with remarkable specific strength and thermal properties Metal matrix nano composites (MMnC) are a new category of materials, in which the reinforcements in the range of nano-meter size are being used At present, the vehicle manufacturers are trying various methods to enhance the efficiency. This necessitates the automobile components to be manufactured from lightweight materials. Across the globe, the researchers are putting their efforts to develop light materials in the form of composites for aerospace and automobile applications Aluminium alloy of grade AA 7075 was selected as the base matrix and it was melted in the resistant heating furnace that has an integral stirrer. Nano size (30–50 The bottom type stir casting set up used for manufacturing of single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites is shown in Test specimens were fabricated from these castings using a wire-cut electro discharge machine (WEDM). The notation for the test samples and description of their processing methods are listed in The theoretical and experimental density of single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites under investigation are shown in The procedure of determining the theoretical and experimental density of a composite through the respective utilisation of rule of mixtures and Archimedes principle was subsequently followed by porosity computations. It was found that porosity of both single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites was higher than unreinforced alloy. This might have been associated with issues such as poor wettability characteristics, particle agglomeration, clustering and pore nucleation at the interface with inadequate mechanical stirring The porosity in the metal matrix composites is instituted due to the improper interfacial reaction between the ceramic reinforcements and the matrix. This interfacial reaction is principally influenced by the factors such as free energy at the interface, convection properties and temperature gradient that exists between particles and matrix during solidification in addition to other parameters viz. stirring speed, melt viscosity, clustering, the density difference between melt and particles The hardness of single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites was determined according to ASTM The tensile tests were conducted on the test specimens according to ASTM The impact strength of single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites was determined using Izod impact testing machine according to ASTM  The scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of aluminium alloy AA7075 (as cast condition) is shown in This paper addressed the comparative study on mechanical and microstructural characterisation of AA 7075 based single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites produced through stir and squeeze cast methods with different preheating temperatures. The composites are prepared with reinforcement of 2, 4 An increase in hardness and tensile strength is observed for single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites with increasing Al In comparison to base alloy, hardness is getting improved by 63.7% and 81.1% for single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposite (stir cast), while an improvement of 90.5% is observed with single reinforced nanocomposite (squeeze cast). An increase in the ultimate tensile strength with magnitudes of 60.1%, 73.8% and 92.3% is observed with the same sequence of these composites over the base matrix. The microstructure and SEM analysis revealed the uniform distribution of particles in the base matrix provided that the weight fraction of nano reinforcement is limited to 2%. Among the different reinforcement preheat temperatures adopted for fabrication of nanocomposites, 500 From the mechanical characterisation tests, it is inferred that the density, hardness and ultimate tensile strength of single and hybrid reinforced nanocomposites are superior to base alloy. However, when nano reinforcements are increased beyond 2%, agglomeration of nanoparticle in the base matrix is inevitable, which deteriorates the mechanical characteristics of hybrid reinforced nanocomposites. On the implementation of secondary material processing such as squeeze casting, even single reinforced nanocomposites own improved properties over hybrid reinforced nanocomposites that are produced through stir casting. The mechanical and microstructural characterisation of hybrid reinforced nanocomposites by squeeze casting is still to be carried out. From this experimental investigation, it is concluded that both squeeze cast single reinforced nanocomposite and stir cast hybrid reinforced nanocomposite exhibit superior mechanical properties over the base alloy, AA 7075. Due to this fact, these composites can be employed as candidate materials in aerospace and automotive sectors, where quality is not a compromise.  