This paper describes an international exercise aimed at assessing the geotechnical engineering profession’s ability to predict the response of shallow foundations on soft clay subjected to undrained loading. Predictions of bearing capacity varied by more than an order of magnitude and settlement by more than two orders of magnitude. Average and median predicted values deviated significantly from measured values. The results of this exercise highlight the need to develop tools to assist engineers to process site investigation data. The development of predictive models that connect directly to site investigation data is discussed.The design of shallow foundations on soft clay subject to undrained centric vertical loading is a routine task for the geotechnical engineering profession. To satisfy the ultimate limit state, the designer is required to ensure that applied loads remain remote from the ultimate bearing capacity of the foundation. Design for the serviceability limit state requires that settlement of the foundation under working loads will be small enough to ensure satisfactory performance of the structure it supports. Foundation design therefore requires an ability to predict both the ultimate bearing capacity and settlements under working loads. As part of the activities of the Australian Research Council (ARC) Centre of Excellence for Geotechnical Science and Engineering (CGSE), an international shallow foundation prediction exercise was conducted with the aim of assessing the predictive capabilities of the geotechnical engineering profession. This paper describes the exercise and compares predictions received from 50 submissions with measured foundation performance of field tests carried out at the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF). It was found that participants significantly overestimated the bearing capacity of the foundation, with the average predicted bearing capacity exceeding the measured value by around 100%. On average, predicted settlement values exceed measured values by more than 600%. To examine reasons for the poor prediction results, a review of strength and stiffness data from the site is presented. It is shown that the site data provides a good indicator of foundation performance via simple foundation models. This suggests that poor predictions cannot be attributed to inaccurate or insufficient information. An assessment of the sources of over prediction of bearing capacity and settlement is presented and the use of technology to automate the processing of soil data interpretation or development of predictive models that connect directly to soil data are discussed as possible solutions. Supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC), the Centre of Excellence for Geotechnical Science and Engineering (CGSE) established the Australian National Field Testing Facility (NFTF) in Ballina, Northern New South Wales (see The ground conditions comprise a crust of alluvial clayey silty sand to a depth of about 1.0–1.5 A comprehensive site investigation has been conducted at the NFTF involving drilling and logging over 15 boreholes with high quality soil samples collected and tested in a range of laboratory apparatus Two load tests were conducted on almost identical foundations. The foundations, 1.8 The prediction exercise was advertised on the CGSE web site ( Participants were invited to make four predictions associated with the foundation performance. These quantities and their measured values are summarised in The predicted values are presented in  Predictions of the settlement at 25% of the ultimate load ( Settlement predictions at 50% of the ultimate load (    Overall, the prediction exercise suggests, at least in the present case, that engineers tend to perceive the bearing capacity of shallow foundations in soft clay to be higher than it actually is, with 82% over predicting the bearing capacity, 55% over predicting by more than 50% and 34% over predicting by more than 100%. The range in values of predicted bearing capacity was more than an order of magnitude (130 The prediction exercise also indicates, for the present case, that engineers perceive soil to be less stiff than it actually is, with 88% over predicting the Given the participants in the foundation prediction exercise significantly over estimated the foundation capacity - on average by around 100% - this section reviews undrained shear strength data from the site. This data is then used in simple bearing capacity calculations in order to determine if there is a clear and consistent link between the available site investigation data and the measured foundation capacity. Following this, an assessment of the parameter selection and prediction methods for the best and worst predictions is presented. Using data available to predictors, undrained shear strength profiles may be estimated using a range of in situ and laboratory tests including triaxial compression, triaxial extension The best-fit linear undrained strength profiles were estimated for each test type, as shown in Bjerrum It is noted that changes in undrained shear strength due to excavation of the foundation pit and construction of the foundation were not considered in this analysis. In reality, excavation of the pit to 1.5 The analysis outlined here indicates that very reasonable predictions of capacity can be achieved using a simple Tresca soil model with a linear strength profile derived from the data provided. A possible source of error in some predictions may stem from the boundary conditions assumed in the numerical analysis. One issue in particular was that some participants did not model the 300 It was found that 13 of the 17 participants who over predicted the bearing capacity by more than 100% used simple hand calculations. Out of these 13 predictions, 11 indicated that they had used a bearing capacity calculation of the form It was found that 4 of the 17 participants who over predicted the bearing capacity by more than 100% used either two or three dimensional finite element analysis, with one using an effective stress method to model undrained behaviour and three using total stress (Tresca) models. Several of the more accurate predictions also used finite element simulations, with one (ID# 18 in Overall, there is no clear trend in terms of which methods worked and which did not. The accuracy appears to be entirely a function of the assumptions made regarding the boundary conditions, soil strength and how model results were interpreted. Clearly, these factors are highly subjective, even for this simple problem. This section of the paper focuses on the application of undrained triaxial compression and self-boring pressuremeter data, both of which were available to participants in the foundation prediction exercise, to estimate soil stiffness profiles at the NFTF site and examine how these stiffness profiles relate to measured foundation performance. Stiffness values were estimated from triaxial compression data in three different ways. Using deviatoric stress ( A shear modulus profile was also derived using a numerical optimisation technique to match the modified Cam clay model to undrained self-boring pressuremeter data. Full details of this process are presented by Gaone et al. To estimate foundation settlements using these stiffness profiles, elastic solutions by Doherty and Deeks In this equation, Adopting a Poisson’s ratio of 0.5 (for undrained constant volume behaviour), vertical stiffness coefficients ( Settlement estimates computed at 25%, 50% and 100% of the total failure load, The elastic load-settlement response for each stiffness profile is presented in Using the same finite element model described above, a simulation was conducted using a linear-elastic perfectly-plastic Tresca soil model with the Participants in the prediction exercise used a range of methods to predict foundation settlement, including elastic solutions and non-linear finite element analysis. As observed for the bearing capacity predictions, there was no clear trend in terms of method accuracy. This suggests that accuracy was highly dependent on the assumptions made regarding soil stiffness, which is highly subjective. It is interesting to note, that of the 5 predictions that were within 50% of the measured The results from the prediction exercise presented in this paper indicate that engineers with the same data and calculation task judge the data in different ways and ultimately produce very different results. Similar findings have previously been presented for prediction exercises involving shallow foundations on soft clay It was demonstrated that reasonably accurate foundation performance predictions can be achieved using simple foundation models with parameters derived from the in situ and laboratory data provided. Therefore, the poor predictions cannot be attributed to insufficient or inaccurate information. No clear trends could be identified between methods used and the accuracy of predictions for either bearing capacity or settlement. The accuracy appeared to be entirely a function of the assumptions made regarding the boundary conditions, how model results were interpreted and, in particular, how soil parameters were selected. The accuracy of predictions was not strongly correlated to the sector of the predictor (i.e. practioner, academic or student). The range in the predicted values for both settlement and bearing capacity is undeniably alarming, with settlements varying by more than two orders of magnitude and the bearing capacity by more than one order of magnitude. A key source of variability in predicted performance stems from the fact that our predictive models (i.e. numerical or analytical methods) remain disconnected from the data that informs them. As a result, significant manual intervention is required to convert in situ or laboratory data into input parameters for use in a predictive model. “Engineering judgement” is applied in this process, which introduces subjectivity and uncertainty in the outcome of design calculations. Automated optimisation tools have been developed to assist engineers in converting measured data from conventional site investigation tests into commonly used constitutive model parameters (e.g. By providing large-scale field test data along with extensive high quality in situ and laboratory test data, the Australian National Field Testing Facility provides an invaluable opportunity to calibrate existing and develop new predictive models for classical geotechnical boundary value problems to advance geotechnical knowledge and practice. This work forms part of the activities of the Centre for Offshore Foundation Systems (COFS), established in 1997 under the Australian Research Council’s Special Research Centres Program. Supported as a node of the The authors extend their sincere thanks to all the participants for contributing to this exercise.