We present an algorithm for the simulation of vicinal surface growth. It combines a lattice gas anisotropic Ising model with a phase-field model. The molecular behavior of individual adatoms is described by the lattice gas model. The microstructure dynamics on the vicinal surface are calculated using the phase-field method. In this way, adsorption processes on two different length scales can be described: nucleation processes on the terraces (lattice gas model) and step-flow growth (phase field model). The hybrid algorithm that is proposed here, is therefore able to describe an epitaxial layer-by-layer growth controlled by temperature and by deposition rate. This method is faster than kinetic Monte Carlo simulations and can take into account the stochastic processes in a comparable way.The presented hybrid algorithm serves to model the surface morphology during crystal growth techniques, which are of great practical interest. Several models (see e.g. Refs. Fluctuations of the adatom density can cause island nucleation and growth on terraces. In previous studies Previously other hybrid schemes for vicinal surface growth have been developed The paper is organized as follows: Sections Originally, the phase-field model for structured surface evolution Eq. Eq. Initially the steps of the surface are parallel to the The Ising model In the present study we assign The time evolution of the Ising model is usually solved by a Metropolis–Monte-Carlo simulation The Kinetic Monte-Carlo (KMC) method Calculation of the rates of all processes that can occur. The rate of diffusion on the flat surface for the whole system is equal to The total rate A random number The choice of an adatom for this process. The determination of the probability The calculation of a new diffusion rate If process By means of the Metropolis algorithm the concentration dependencies of the diffusion constant and the desorption rate can be estimated. These dependencies are used in the phase-field module of the hybrid algorithm presented below. For this aim the space- and time-averaged diffusion constant and the averaged desorption rate are solved at the constant space-averaged adatom density that occurs on the flat surface without deposition and nucleation processes. The averaging is carried out over the simulation box with 300×300 sites and for 2000 events. The space- and time-averaged diffusion constant and the averaged desorption rate are calculated according to the following relations The formation of temporary associations of particles, so-called clusters, leads to the nucleation of islands on the flat terraces and at step edges. In this paper we assume a Frank–van der Merve mode of crystal growth, i.e. layer-by-layer growth. In this case the particles are more strongly bound to the substrate surface than to each other, and only monolayer islands occur. The nucleation procedure on the flat surface is as follows. All clusters are identified by an extension of the Hoshen–Kopelman algorithm The mean value of the binding energy of particles in a cluster The “critical” cluster size for transformation to an island can be derived according to the procedure suggested in During the simulation the island nucleation rate is solved according to the following equation: The nucleation in the KMC simulation is modeled by adding an island nucleation procedure to the KMC event list with the nucleation rate proportional to In order to generate the spontaneous noise in the phase-field module, which triggers the spontaneous island nucleation, we assume random fluctuations of the incoming flux in Eq. The hybrid algorithm is a combination of the phase-field model for vicinal surface growth presented in Section First, the quantities of the continuum model are transformed to the corresponding ones of the lattice gas model by choosing the discretization cell-width of the phase-field model as The phase-field variable on the flat terraces assumes odd integer values. Therefore the levels with In the island nucleation procedure, which is applied in the lattice gas module, the energy of clusters The number of time steps of the phase-field module between the nucleation events Note that in order to simulate step flow growth in the KMC simulation, we take into account the nucleation of dimers on the steps and the creation of kinks. Then we assume that the incorporation probability of an adatom at atomic sites of the kinks is unity (so-called kink-flow growth In order to incorporate the physical mechanism of the Ehrlich–Schwöbel barrier Eq. Furthermore, in the phase-field model we take into account the concentration dependencies of diffusion and desorption at homogeneous surfaces. These dependencies are obtained from the KMC simulations described in detail in Section The modification of the adhesive strength at the step edges As it was mentioned in the previous sections, the suggested hybrid algorithm is a combination of the continuous phase field model and the discrete 2D nucleation procedure. Our KMC simulation also corresponds to a hybrid algorithm, combining the discrete KMC method extended by the Metropolis algorithm, and the same discrete 2D nucleation procedure. The aim of this section is to examine the scaling of the computational cost for both simulation methods. For the KMC simulation of a domain of size The scaling of the computational cost of the phase-field module in the hybrid algorithm can be estimated as The island nucleation procedure also increases the computation time. This increase depends on the nucleation time step Hence the total computational cost for the hybrid algorithm is smaller than the total cost for the corresponding KMC simulation minimum in two cases: if the scale number The aim of this section is to demonstrate that the hybrid algorithm is faster than KMC and that the numerical errors are of a tolerable level. Simulations were performed to compare the results of the hybrid scheme to the KMC simulation presented in Section The data in In  The next set of the simulations was performed on the same domain for various diffusion constants and deposition rates. The data were averaged over a period of time that allowed the growth of 100 layers. In In order to test the overall behavior of simulations by the presented hybrid algorithm and to investigate the dynamics of step-flow growth and island nucleation the time evolution and temperature dependencies of macroscopic quantities of the surface during epitaxial growth are studied. In this study we employ the following macroscopic quantities. From the phase-field variable one obtains the so-called surface width A related quantity is a space-averaged gradient of the phase-field variable The growth rate is also a macroscopic quantity used to control epitaxial growth. This quantity is derived with the help of the phase-field variable according to Simulations were performed for a 240×240 lattice site periodic domain with three steps and In order to compare the KMC simulation and the hybrid algorithm, we illustrate the time evolution of the adatom density in  The growth rate in the steady state obeys the expression The simulated temperature dependencies of the space and time averaged adatom density are shown in  In At temperatures between 800 and 1200 K, We have presented a hybrid algorithm for the two-scale modeling of adsorption processes at structured surfaces. The method combines the continuum phase-field model, which simulates the macroscopic dynamics of step-flow growth on a large scale, and the lattice-gas Ising model on the atomic scale for the simulation of nucleation processes by clustering of adatoms. To take into account the effect of the interaction between adatoms, the hybrid algorithm includes the concentration dependencies of diffusion and desorption rates, previously solved by the KMC method. The presented hybrid algorithm is faster than the corresponding KMC simulation and yields comparable results with numerical errors being at a tolerable level. Numerical simulation results obtained by the present hybrid algorithm can quantitatively predict the microstructure evolution during epitaxial growth. In this way it yields engineering laws which relate the growth mode to manufacturing parameters such as the temperature and the flux of incoming particles, and to material parameters such as the interaction strength of the adatoms and their diffusion and sticking coefficients on the surface. As a first example we show that the occurrence of nucleation processes in addition to step-flow growth can change the growth mode to a layer-by-layer growth controlled by the temperature and by the deposition rate. The authors would like to thank W. Selke, R. Conradt, R. Prieler for valuable discussions and support and S. Cottenier for a critical reading of this manuscript. This project is supported by the German Research Foundation as Em 68/12-1 and Ge 1202/03-1.