Mineral resources are a formal quantification of naturally occurring materials. Estimation of resource parameters such as grade and thickness may be carried out using different methodologies. In this paper, a soft methodology, which is artificial neural network (ANN) based fuzzy modelling is presented for grade estimation and its stages are demonstrated. The neuro-fuzzy method uses preliminary clustering and finally estimates the ore grades based on radial basis neural network and interpolation. Two case studies designed for both simulated and real data sets indicate that the approach is relatively accurate and flexible. In addition, the method is suitable for modelling via limited number of data. The results and performance comparisons with conventional methods show that the computing method is efficient.Mineral inventories may be used for long-term production planning. These are formal quantifications of naturally occurring materials, estimated by a variety of empirically or theoretically based procedures. Quantification is to a level of confidence appropriate to available data and the stated needs of the estimate It is known that geological systems are characterized by particularly high uncertainties Modelling limited numbers of data is the most important superiority of fuzzy set theory compared with other conventional methods used in geosciences such as statistics and geostatistics. Applicability of fuzzy set theory in modelling the geological based domains has been discussed by different authors The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section Global grade estimations of a mineral deposit can be used to quantify a reserve or resource that will form the basis of continuing production. In this process, good accuracy, which is nearness to the truth, is the main objective of estimation. However, many uncertainties in mineral inventories can lead to inaccurate estimates: sampling error, estimation error, method selection, geologic error, etc. These uncertainties also require a need to develop grade estimation methodologies which can assist to appraise the project. In practice, the true value of an ore grade is never known until it has been measured. Because the measuring is expensive, grade is estimated using the available data. The grade estimation problem can be stated as follows: one measures the actual grade of some localized samples and one wants to estimate the grade of the whole deposit. The natural solution is thus, knowing a few values In this section, an artificial neural network based fuzzy modelling approach In order to determine data structure and the number of rules, a fuzzy clustering method is applied. Fuzzy c-means clustering (FCM) For this purpose, an input matrix Following the parameter selection, the data set is partitioned in the Cartesian product space Although fuzzy models are capable of describing complex, non-linear, and ill-defined processes explicitly by means of fuzzy if-then rules, they are not equipped with learning capabilities. In order to provide fuzzy models with such learning capabilities, conventional learning rules from neural network theory are used A general fuzzy rule base which includes On the other hand, determination of the width of the triangle base    The last step of the model is interpolation (defuzzification). The crisp values are taken from the algorithm by modified indexed center of gravity The algorithm presented above is established based on a learning mechanism. Final Eq. The components of the hybrid algorithm can be expressed as follows In the first stage, the computer algorithm realizes preliminary clustering (FCM) and determines the best cluster partition using validity indexes. Based on these inputs, first the parameters in The neuro-fuzzy modelling approach is illustrated using two data sets. In the first case study, the method is employed for estimating simulated grades. In the second case study, a real data set is used and this time, the proposed modelling approach is considered for the purpose of lignite quality estimation. The artificial neural network based fuzzy models in the case studies are implemented by MATLAB functions A conditionally simulated data set was produced a 20 Preliminary clustering applications for neuro-fuzzy model were carried out by using the FCM clustering method. For different number of clusters, data set were trained and various cluster centers and partition matrix alternatives have been taken from these operations. Determining the rule structure, rules were selected as equal to the number of clusters. In addition, a Gaussian type membership function was employed and the model mechanism was established based on RBNN learning. Estimated grades taken from the neuro-fuzzy model were given in In order to compare the model performance with the similar estimation method and evaluate the results, the inverse square distance-weighting (ISDW) method and four performance indices (standard deviation ‘ Sivas–Kalburcayiri field considered in this study is one of the most productive basins in Anatolia. Lignite seams in the field are used to feed coal to a power plant. The locations of the 65 records ( FCM clustering algorithm has been performed for defining model structure. There is a critical point that determination of numbers of clusters. In order to find a suitable numbers of clusters, various methods On the other hand, in order to compare the model performance with a conventional approach on testing data set, point kriging estimations have been carried out. Obviously, kriging estimation largely depends on the variogram model. In the present approach, training data variability in spatial system was evaluated by a spherical model ( In order to evaluate the performances, the indices described in case study 1 have been employed. As can be seen in The results and performance evaluations indicate that the proposed hybrid modelling technique provides high generalization capability. In the first case study, the model outperforms the ISDW model. As seen in In the second case study, the performance of kriging on testing data set is lower than the performance of the neuro-fuzzy model. In addition, kriging estimation produced more smooth outputs. Since data variability is an important parameter for modelling studies in geosciences due to project planning, the smoothing is not preferred by modeller. At first sight, the training and test performance of the hybrid model in This paper has focused on a hybrid intelligent modelling algorithm based on neural network and clustering based fuzzy inference system for appraising the mineral reserve parameters. In practice, the geological reserves include many complexities and uncertainties due to their natural characteristics and experimental procedures. Therefore, use of soft hybrid computing which is an effective tool for quantifying the uncertainties in estimating mineral inventory parameters has been aimed in handling the problem. In the study, numerical examples have been established using both simulated and real data sets. The performance comparisons have been carried out with well-known conventional methods such as kriging and inverse distance weighting. The results and performance comparisons with conventional methods show that the soft computing method is efficient. The case studies show that the hybrid intelligent methodology employed in this study is relatively accurate, practical and flexible. In addition, it may be very suitable especially for assessing the deposit by a limited number of data. As a result of the paper, it could be suggested that neural-fuzzy modelling, which is an alternative intelligent synergism, provides a promising tool for estimating the geological resource parameters.