Energycane is a promising bioenergy crop for warm south-eastern US regions and existing sugarcane machinery is being adapted for energycane cultivation. Because of energycane's comparatively higher fibre content and smaller stem diameters, the cutting blades must be optimized for energycane harvesting and size reduction. To optimize cutting blade designs, this study investigated the effect of cutting speed and blade oblique angle on cutting energy. An impact type cutting mechanism was used to determine the cutting energy cost of individual stems. The results showed that the specific cutting energy increases with cutting speed. The lowest average specific energy was 0.26 J mm−1 for a 60° oblique cut at an average cutting speed of 7.9 m s−1, whereas the highest average specific cutting energy was 1.24 J mm−1 for a straight cut at an average cutting speed of 16.4 m s−1. The specific cutting energy showed a close correlation with stem diameter and stem cross-sectional area. For a 30° oblique angle at 11.3 m s−1 average cutting speed, the cutting energy varied from 4.5 to 15 J as the energycane stem diameter varied from 11 to 17 mm. Comparisons with sugarcane studies indicated that optimisation of cutting speed and blade oblique angle can result in significant savings in cutting energy, whilst simultaneously improving the quality of cut. This study emphasises the need for further investigation of the energycane cutting process especially at higher cutting speeds with cutting devices with varying moments of inertia.Stem cross sectional area, m Stem diameter in the cutting direction, m Stem diameter in direction perpendicular to the cutting direction, m Energy required to cut energycane stem, J Moment of inertia of the cutting arm, kg m Initial speed of the cutting arm before cutting stem, rad s Final speed of the cutting arm after cutting stem, rad s Worldwide, renewable energy sources are being investigated as an alternative to fossil fuels. Biomass, a renewable energy source, has the potential to supply fuel and electricity compatible with existing transportation and power generation infrastructures. The energy consumed in the US is expected to increase to 120.8 EJ by 2034 from 105 EJ in 2008 ( Most of the plants called energycanes are hybrid species within the Energycane harvesting is similar to sugarcane harvesting, where the green tops are removed and left in the field. Some harvesters remove the green top and heap the canes that are burnt to remove trash representing about 15% of the total biomass ( It is expected that sugarcane harvesters and forage equipment will work well for energycane ( Many studies investigated the effect of cutting speed on cutting energy and relevant studies are briefly summarized here. For maize stem cutting, a distinct minimum energy requirement was found at a cutting velocity of 2.65 m s Many other studies examined the effect of blade angle and blade design on the cutting energy. A blade peripheral velocity of 13.8 m s Many other studies examined the effect of stem diameter on cutting energy and relevant ones are described here. The cutting energy was found proportional to maize stem diameter ( To avoid splitting of sugarcane stubbles which causes fungal and other diseases, it would be beneficial to keep the impact force less than the bending resistance of the remaining stem section for all depths of blade penetration ( Thus, this literature surveyed indicates that cutting speed, blade oblique angle, and stem diameter play a key role in the energycane cutting process. However, there are no studies investigating energycane cutting mechanics. To improve energycane harvesting and size reduction equipment, the objectives of this study were to investigate the effect of cutting speed, blade oblique angle, and stem diameter on the cutting energy required for individual energycane stems. Energycane stems (variety Ho 02-113) cut close to the ground were collected in July 2011 from a first year ratoon crop grown in Highlands, Florida. In the test assembly, the energycane stem was oriented vertically with its base firmly held in place to mimic the mechanical rigidity of the root structure of an energycane plant in the field ( The experimental arrangement consisted of an impact type cutting arm ( The angular position of the cutting arm was recorded by an optical encoder with an angular resolution of 0.175°, sampled at 100 kHz (model S5-2048-236-I-S-B, US Digital, Vancouver, WA, USA). Angular speeds were determined immediately before and after contact of the cutting blade with the stem. For all the tested stem samples, the cutting process completed within 10° angular rotation of the cutting arm following its first contact with the stems. The cutting arm radius was 0.25 m and the tip of the cutting arm travelled 43.6 mm linear distance when rotated by 10°. The centre of gravity of the cutting arm was estimated by recording the mass of the cutting arm as it rested partially on a balance while fixed at the pivotal centre. Taking the moment about the pivotal centre of the cutting arm gave the effective length of the cutting arm. Also, the natural pendulum-like response of the cutting arm was recorded to determine its moment of inertia. The coefficients in a second order pendulum response equation were adjusted until the recorded response of the pendulum matched the ideal solution. The optimisation was performed using the ‘ode45’ and ‘lsnonlin’ functions of Matlab The first experiment was conducted to study the effect of oblique angle and cutting speed on the cutting energy. The parameters were three oblique angles (0, 30, and 60°, To study the effect of energycane diameter on the cutting energy, the second experiment was conducted with a 30° blade oblique angle and 0.34 MPa air-cannon pressure. To calculate cutting energy using Eq.  Specific cutting energy per unit stem diameter correlated better with cutting speed than specific cutting energy per unit area did, as seen in The best correlation was 0.73 for the 60° oblique angle with specific cutting energy per unit diameter (  For the straight cut at 0.28 MPa air pressure, occasionally partial cutting was observed ( It appears that at cutting speeds below 10 m s  An air-cannon powered impact type cutting mechanism was used to determine the energy required to cut individual energycane stems at various oblique angles and cutting speeds. The cutting energy per unit of either stem diameter or cross-sectional area was found to increase with the cutting speed. Specific cutting energy per unit stem diameter correlated better with cutting speed than specific cutting energy per unit area. The lowest average specific cutting energy was 0.26 J mm This publication contains data produced under an Energy Biosciences Institute-funded award. The authors would like to thank Ms. Amanda Valentine and Mr. Kent Valentine who were instrumental in fabricating the test apparatus. The authors would also like to thank Prof. Grace Danao and Mr. Joe Binder (BP Biofuels), for supplying energycane stems, as well as undergraduate students Mr. Joshua Jochem and Ms. Colleen Moloney for their assistance during the experiments.