To reveal the physical characteristics of fractured-subsequently-filled granite and to guide hot dry rock (HDR) mining, this paper studied the permeability at 500 °C and 1000 m hydrostatic pressure of the parent rock (type Ⅰ granite), hydrothermal fluid backfill (type Ⅱ granite), cementation interface between the backfill and the parent rock laterally positioned through the specimen (type III granite), and cementation interface between the backfill and the parent rock longitudinally positioned through the specimen (type IV granite). The results show that the threshold temperature of the permeability changes for the four types of granite (i.e., types I, II, III, and IV) are 300 °C, 200 °C, 300 °C and 250 °C, respectively. From the threshold temperature to the maximum test temperature, the permeability of type I, II, III and IV granite increases exponentially by 1, 2, 2 and 3 orders of magnitude, reaching 10−6 D, 10−4 D, 10−5 D and 10−4 D, respectively. Micro-observation results of the micro-structures show that thermal cracking of the heterogeneous rock mass is the main reason for the increase in permeability of type I and III granite; the low strength and deteriorated mechanical properties caused by dissolution are the main reasons for the permeability of type II granite to significantly exceed that of type I and III granite; the extreme heterogeneity and the deteriorated mechanical properties of the backfill together indicate that type IV granite has the best permeability. During reservoir construction by hydraulic fracturing in fractured-subsequently-filled granite, the flow of the fracturing water along the direction perpendicular to the cementation interface is limited. However, when the reservoir temperature exceeds 250 °C, the backfill strengthened by the cementation near the cementation interface restores the weak-plane structure characteristics; when the reservoir temperature exceeds 400 °C, the thermal cracking fractures near the cementation interface interconnect with each other along the cementation interface to form a permeability channel. Therefore, the fracturing water in the backfill can easily flow along the cementation interface. Eventually, reservoir construction in fractured-subsequently-filled granite can greatly reduce engineering costs, increase reservoir water-rock heat exchange areas and improve heat exchange efficiency, which provides a new technical and theoretical approach for deep HDR geothermal exploitation.As green resources for sustainable applications, geothermal resources are being developed and utilized more widely throughout the world. Among these resources, hot dry rocks (HDRs), which have temperatures of approximately 200–500 °C and are mainly found in granite bodies located 3–10 km underground [ The exploratory development of HDR geothermal resources started with the enhanced geothermal system (EGS) implemented in Fenton Hill, USA, in the 1970s [ The principle of reservoir stimulation is to increase the reservoir permeability. Therefore, researchers at home and abroad have conducted many studies. Numerous researchers have conducted extensive laboratory studies to explore the mechanism of reservoir permeability changes. Kamali-Asl [ To find more effective reservoir stimulation methods, various approaches have been proposed by researchers, including conventional hydraulic fracturing [ The above research ideas on reservoir stimulation have all regarded granite as a whole body. Although the condition of high temperatures can improve the permeability of granite, the hydraulic fracturing technologies and the staged fracturing technologies that are proposed technologies considered for the construction of artificial reservoirs worldwide are all facing many difficulties due to the ultra-low permeability and high strength of such granites [ Through extensive geological investigations and further study, we found that the deep HDR mass is not intact, includes fractures and is heterogeneous due to the existence of a fracture backfill. Based on this, the idea of using fracture backfilling as a natural weak-plane structure to greatly simplify the construction of reservoirs has been proposed [ A large number of X-type shear fractures were formed in the deep granite body due to the intense tectonic movement and then the fractures were filled by multi-stage high temperature magma and hydrothermal fluid on a large scale to form fractured-subsequently-filled granite. In the long-term geological tectonic movement, part of the granite body had been pushed from the deep crust to the surface to form a granite body outcrop, which can be glimpsed by human beings. The experimental samples were taken from the Luya Mountain, Shanxi, China. The behaviour of granite in this area truly represents the characteristics of deep HDR mass, and this area is the best for collecting rare samples for the study of deep HDR behaviour [ The permeability tests of four types of granite samples were carried out at 600 °C high-temperature and high-pressure rock mass triaxial testing machine independently developed by the Taiyuan University of Technology, as shown in The objective of this paper is to replicate the permeability of a natural HDR mass under the influences of high temperature action and at a depth of 1000 m. Therefore, during the testing process, the axial and confining pressures applied to the specimens were 25 MPa, and these pressures remained unchanged. Then, the specimens were heated and the permeability of each specimen was measured at room temperature (approximately 20 °C), 100 °C, 150 °C, 200 °C, 250 °C, 300 °C, 350 °C, 400 °C, 450 °C and 500 °C. The heating rate was 1 °C/min, and each target temperature was held for at least 2 h to reach heat equilibrium in the sample before determining any measurements [ One-dimensional Darcy’s law is used to calculate permeability: The variation in the permeability with different temperatures of the four types of granite specimens under 1000 m hydrostatic pressure and different pore pressures is shown in From the above figures, it can be seen that the permeability and the variation law changes, at the temperatures of the four types of granites under different pore pressures, are basically identical. Therefore, this paper focuses on the analyses concerning the permeability of granite under the pore pressure of 4 MPa. For the type I granite, the permeability of the granite fluctuates slowly with increasing temperature within 300 °C, and the magnitude is 10 For the type II granite, within the temperature range of 200–500 °C, the magnitude of the permeability of granite increases dramatically from 10 For the type III granite, similar to the type I granite, the permeability fluctuates steadily when the temperature is lower than 300 °C, and the magnitude is also 10 For the type IV granite, the permeability remains basically unchanged in the range of 200–250 °C, and the magnitude of permeability is 10 From the above results, it can be concluded that the permeabilities of the four types of granites vary similarly with temperatures. That is, in the lower temperature range, the permeability fluctuates slightly with increasing temperature first; then, when the temperature exceeds a specific value, the permeability begins to increase rapidly. The temperature at which the permeability changes abruptly is called the threshold temperature of permeability change with temperature [ From To reveal the mechanism of the difference in permeability of the four types of granite with temperature, a micro-observation experiment on the micro-structure of fractured-subsequently-filled granite was carried out. The micro-observation thin sections of granite were made according to the method described in Yin [ It can be concluded from Assuming that From The hydrothermal fluid released from the magma during the crystallization process contains H Although the backfill is the weak-plane structure, because of the “healing” effect caused by magma or hydrothermal fluid intrusions into the parent rock near the cementation interface between the backfill and the parent rock (see From the above results, it can be concluded that the existence of backfill has a significant influence on the permeability of the fractured-subsequently-filled granite. For type II granite, the ratio of For type III granite, the trend of permeability change with temperature is similar to that of type I granite within 200–500 °C, so the ratio of Finally, for type IV granite, the ratio of According to the analysis of the above results, thermal stimulation can improve reservoir permeability. However, for the parent rock, the permeability at 500 °C is 45 times that at 200 °C. Although the multiple is large, the specific permeability is still small, which is difficult to meet the requirements of reservoir construction. This paper concluded that the permeability of fractured-subsequently-filled granite will be essentially changed due to the existence of backfill. Among them, the backfill itself, as a weak-plane structure, will increase permeability due to its insufficient strength. The permeability of type II granite is 65 times that of the parent rock at 500 °C, and the magnitude is 10 Reservoir construction is the decisive factor for the success or failure of HDR mining, and the mechanism of reservoir construction is to improve the reservoir permeability in a large range to improve the heat exchange efficiency between the water and the rock. From the permeability test results, it can be concluded that due to the existence of fracture backfill, the permeability of the backfill and the cementation interface on both sides of the fracture-filled zones has been superior to that of the parent rock under high temperature and high pressure. Specifically, the permeability of the above regions is at least two orders of magnitude higher than that of the intact granite at 500 °C [ Generally, reservoir of hot dry rock geothermal energy is not intact rock mass, which includes fractures induced by tectonic movement. The tectonic fractures were subsequently filled by hydrothermal fluid. This kind of reservoir was so-called fractured-subsequently-filled reservoir. In order to study the transport property of deep fractured-subsequently-filled reservoir and guide HDR geothermal energy exploitation, we performed permeability experiment on four types of fractured-subsequently-filled granite collected from Luya Mountain, Shanxi Province, China, under high temperature (RT - 500 °C) and high pressure (1000 m hydrostatic pressure) using high-temperature high-pressure triaxial test machine for rock mechanics. The following conclusions were obtained: The threshold temperatures of permeability change of types I, II, III and IV granite are 300 °C, 200 °C, 300 °C and 250 °C, respectively. When the temperature is lower than the threshold temperature, the permeability of the four types of granite fluctuates slightly with increasing temperature; when the temperature exceeds the threshold temperature, the permeability of the four types of granite increases exponentially with increasing temperature. The permeability magnitude of type I granite increases from 10 The critical temperature of the backfill strengthened by cementation near the cementation interface to restore its weak-plane structure characteristics is approximately 250 °C. The thermal cracking fracture propagation is limited in the direction perpendicular to the cementation interface within 500 °C. While the permeability channel along the direction of the cementation interface will be formed when the temperature exceeds approximately 400 °C. During the construction of reservoirs in fractured-subsequently-filled granite, fracturing water will expand widely in the backfill and along the cementation interface on both sides of the fracture-filled zones, which simplifies the reservoir construction process, greatly reduces engineering cost, increases heat exchange area and improves heat exchange efficiency between the water and the rock mass in reservoirs. It provides a new technical and theoretical approach for deep HDR geothermal exploitation.  No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. This work was supported by the