The permeation of copper(II) through a supported liquid membrane impregnated with LIX 973N (oxime derivative) in Iberfluid has been studied. A model is proposed describing the transport mechanism, which consists of diffusion process through the source aqueous diffusion layer, fast interfacial chemical reaction and diffusion through the membrane. The experimental results are explained by equations describing the rate of transport. Various rate-controlling processes take place as the metal transport occurs.There are two basic forms of liquid membrane processes: surfactant liquid membrane (SLM) and immobilised liquid membrane (ILM) technologies, with potential applications which cover the separation of hydrocarbons, metals, inorganic and organic species, biotechnology and medical applications. The broad spectrum of metal extractions which has been studied with liquid membranes includes noble metals, alkaline and earth alkaline metals, rare earth and radioactive metals and heavy and toxic metals LIX 973N is a new member of the oxime derivatives family and its performance has been proved on copper(II) extraction from ammmoniacal/ammonium carbonate medium The characteristics of LIX 973N have been given in a previous paper Stock metal solutions were prepared by dissolving the required amount of the corresponding metal sulphate salt (AR grade) in distilled water. All other chemicals used in this work were of AR grade. The flat-sheet supported liquid membranes were impregnated with an extractant solution containing LIX 973N, dissolved in suitable diluent, by immersion for 24 h and then leaving to drip for a few seconds before being placed in the transport cell. The flat-sheet membrane used was Millipore Durapore GVHP4700, of 125-μm thick microporous polyvinylidenedifluoride film. The transport experiments were carried out in a permeation cell consisting of two cubic compartments made of methacrylate and separated by the membrane. The membrane geometrical area was 11.33 cm In preliminary studies, various sulphuric acid solutions were tested as stripping reagents. Solutions of 180 g/L H Membrane permeability was determined by monitoring the metal concentration by AAS (Perkin Elmer 1100B) in the source solution as a function of time. To model the mass transfer of copper(II), it is necessary to consider diffusion of the solute through the aqueous feed boundary layer, reversible chemical reaction at the feed interface, diffusion of the metal complex species in the membrane and chemical reaction at the receiving interface. The extraction of copper(II) by LIX 973N in Iberfluid has previously been reported The mass balance equation for HR is described by: The mass transfer of copper(II) crossing the membrane is described considering diffusional parameters. The interfacial flux due to the chemical reaction has not been considered, since the chemical reaction is considered to occur instantaneously relative to the diffusion processes (i) the composition of the receiving solution is such that the extraction equilibrium is completely shifted to the left at the membrane-aqueous receiving interface, (ii) the membrane polarity is low enough to make negligible the concentration of charged species with respect to that of uncharged species. At steady state, the equations which describe the aqueous diffusion film flux, In The distribution coefficient of copper(II) between the membrane phase and the stripping phase is much lower than that between the feed phase and the membrane, thus, the concentration of the copper-extracted complex in the membrane phase at the stripping solution side may be considered negligible compared to that at the feed solution side. This assumption is derived from solvent extraction investigations; copper(II) is rapidly extracted using LIX 973N, and then completely stripped by using sulphuric acid. Then, At steady state, From (i) [HR] (ii) [HR] These assumptions lead to (i): The permeability coefficient can be calculated from the slope of the plot ln([Cu] When the total copper(II) concentration in the aqueous feed is such that [HR] The plots of ln ([Cu] A number of experiments were conducted to define the adequate hydrodynamic conditions. The permeability of the membrane was studied as a function of the stirring speed on the feed solution side, but maintaining constant the agitation of the receiving solution at 1600 min From By assumption of a value of 10 For shorter times, the membrane permeability is controlled by diffusion The slope of the straight line and The effect of metal concentration on the membrane permeation was also investigated, and the results are shown in In The effect of the presence of ammonium carbonate in the source phase on copper(II) permeability has been studied by varying its concentration between 10 and 50 g/L. The organic phase was 20% v/v LIX 973N in Iberfluid, whereas the source and receiving phases contained 0.1 g/L Cu (pH 9.45±0.02) and 180 g/L sulphuric acid, respectively. Results show that the presence of ammonium carbonate (within the present range of concentrations studied) does not appreciably influence copper transport, in accordance with previous Cu(II) liquid–liquid extraction results using LIX 973N Initially, the membrane permeability coefficient is a function of time and the rate of metal transport is controlled by the diffusion in the membrane. At long times when the copper(II) concentration in the aqueous source solution is low, metal permeation can be described by a time-independent permeability coefficient, this situation being representative of an aqueous diffusion film controlled permeation process. The mass transfer coefficient in the source phase was calculated from the model as 50 μm/s, and the thickness of the aqueous boundary layer was calculated to be 20 μm. This work was carried out through the support of Project MAT98-1345-CE (CICYT). Also, thanks to Mr. J.L. Bascones and Mr. M. López for their assistance in the experimental work.