Most prediction methods used to calculate mining-induced subsidence are empirical, which cannot explain the mechanism of fundamental rock strata movement. In this paper, based on key stratum theory and the mechanical analysis of overburden, a new analytical solution, the Analogous Hyperbola Subsidence Model (AHSM), was proposed to describe the movement and damage of inner burden. Mining-induced rock strata movement was verified using the Distinct Element Method (UDEC), to assess the performance of the theoretical model. Three subsidence parameters (Smax/T, Sgoaf/Smax, D/H), generally used to describe surface subsidence trough, agree with statistical field measurements of the South Coalfield in Australia. The surface subsidence and the movement boundary in the overburden are very close to the theoretical predictions. Additionally, the primary key stratum damages the least in the overlying strata: its broken length is the smallest. The width of subsidence trough and maximum surface subsidence increase as the primary key stratum drops.Coal mining can cause surface subsidence and damage to surface structures, which is why it has been intensively investigated in the past several decades. However, the process of accurately predicting mining-induced subsidence is yet not understood. This research gives us insight into the movement and damage of internal overburden during shallow coal mining. Based on key stratum theory, we propose the Analogous Hyperbola Subsidence Model (AHSM) to describe the movement and damage of integral overburden. Additionally, the Universal Distinct Element Code (UDEC) is used to simulate the rock strata movement and subsidence caused by mining. The numerical results of this study are highly consistent with field observation data. To validate them, the subsidence boundary in the overburden, and surface subsidence, values obtained from UDEC were compared with the theoretical prediction based on AHSM. We also further investigated the variation in the AHSM as the primary key stratum (PKS) dropped. The new model provides a more reliable subsidence prediction tool and a more complete understanding of the rock strata movement induced by mining.  Additionally, mining-induced subsidence is closely related to the mechanical properties of overburden. There is a big difference in those properties that react to the variation of the draw angle between different coal fields. In According to the key stratum theory, The determination criterion for the primary key stratum (PKS) can be expressed as: Bedrock below PKS During the excavation of the longwall face, a large void is created that disturbs the equilibrium in the overburden. Due to the collapse of some bedrock above this void, an arch is formed. Beyond this arch, the rock mass is undisturbed. An increase in the excavation's width causes the arch to expand vertically and horizontally, as shown in The subsidence boundary of bedrock passes through points Topsoil or soft strata above PKS The overburden collapses from the bottom-up as the excavation's width increases. When the span of PKS reaches a critical value, it breaks, resulting in the subsidence of rock masses between the PKS and the ground surface. The rock masses outside of the arch's shoulders (the red parts in  Substituting Eq. Based on Eq. The stability of the potentially sliding rock mass in When the safety factor As a result, the subsidence boundary of topsoil or soft strata can be expressed as The subsidence boundary of topsoil passes through points Primary key stratum The movement boundary of primary key stratum can be expressed as Therefore, combining Eq. Coal mining will lead to the collapse and the periodical fracture of overburden. The disturbed overburden is categorized from the bottom-up, into the caved zone, the bed separation zone and the ground subsidence zone, as shown in The movement of the PKS will cause topsoil dropping and surface subsidence. The topsoil can be regarded as a granular media, which can move randomly after mining. Therefore, the stochastic medium theory can be used to predict its subsidence. It is assumed that the movement of the PKS can be divided into infinitesimal subsidence elements. Based on the stochastic medium theory, the surface subsidence induced by mining equals the sum of the movement due to each elemental subsidence. Based on the superposition principle of the stochastic medium theory, the surface subsidence, caused by the sum subsidence of all micro-units in the PKS, can be expressed as The Southern Coalfield is one of the five major coalfields within the Sydney-Gunnedah Basin in Australia. The principal coal-bearing sequence in the Southern Coalfield is the Illawarra Coal Measures, which consists of four coal seams of proven or potential economic significance. In descending order, these are the Bulli Seam, the Balgownie Seam, the Wongawilli Seam and the Tongarra Seam. The Bulli Seam is the topmost formation in the Illawarra Coal Measures. The Bulli Seam has been extensively mined in the northern part of the coalfield. The thickness of the Bulli Seam is a maximum of 4.0 m in the northern part of the coalfield, with a regional decrease to the south. The immediate roof of the Bulli Seam is the Coal Cliff Sandstone of the Narrabeen Group. The main roof of the Bulli Seam is Scarborough Sandstone. Based on the determination criteria of the key stratum in Eq. The motions of overburden induced by mining are obviously inconsistent due to the differences in their joints and mechanical characteristics. The Universal Distinct Element Code (UDEC), which is based on the discrete element method, has been proven to be feasible and appropriate for addressing the non-continuous processes of bed separation and rock strata fracturing during mining. For this study, a two-dimensional model was set up along the seam strike. The numerical model used measures 800 m × 341 m (width × height). The model was divided into ten rock layers by the stratifications between the strata corresponding to their thicknesses, as shown in The bottom boundary of the model is fixed. Both the left and the right boundaries are constrained in a horizontal direction. Based on 206 measurements of in-situ stress across the entire Sydney Basin, the ratio of horizontal stress to vertical stress was found to be in the range of 1.40–3.26.  The thickness of the coal seam decreases from the north to the south in the South Coalfield, and the panel width is also different between mine faces. This will cause a difference in maximum subsidence, and in the extent of the surface subsidence. Therefore, three parameters, namely the maximum subsidence factor S  The draw angle in the Southern Coalfield varies from 2°–56°; the average value was approximately 29° with nearly 70% of the observed values.    There was a scarcity of rock material behaviour, and joint properties of each layer in the overburden, because of its high cost to get rock samples by drilling holes from the ground surface. This greatly limits the verification of the AHSM. It is also considered that the AHSM appears during shallow coal mining. However, defining ‘shallow’ or ‘deep’ mining is very difficult. The differences between shallow and deep mining are not simply related to the buried depth of the coal seam, but instead include in-situ stress, mining-induced stress, and the geological and geotechnical conditions of the rock masses. Based on the numerical and theoretical analyses, we have drawn the following conclusions: Based on the key stratum theory, a novel model (AHSM) was proposed to describe the movement and subsidence of the inner burden during shallow coal mining. The PKS passes through the infection points of AHSM, and damages least in the overlying strata. The AHSM will provide a scientific guide for estimating the safety of underground pipelines that may be influenced by nearby coal mining. The numerical (UDEC) subsidence results were validated by being compared with field-observed data, all of which were in a very good agreement. The movement boundary in overburden and the surface subsidence values obtained from UDEC, are very close to the theoretical prediction based on AHSM. This verifies the rationality of AHSM to some extent. Additionally, as the PKS sinks, the maximum surface subsidence and the width of surface subsidence trough increase. The bulking factor The authors would like to thank the projects (Grants No: The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at