Additive manufacturing processes like selective laser beam melting of polymers (LBM) are established for production of prototypes and individualized parts. The transfer to serial production currently is hindered by the limited availability of polymer powders with good processability.
                  Within this contribution the effect of powder properties, such as particle size, shape and flowability on the processability in LBM and their influence on device quality is exemplified for polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) materials. A process chain for the production of spherical polymer microparticles has been developed to obtain PBT powder materials. The process chain consists of three steps: first, polymer microparticles are produced by wet grinding. Second, the particle shape is engineered by rounding in a heated downer reactor to improve the flowability of the product. Third, a further improvement of flowability of the still cohesive spherical PBT particles is realized by dry coating with fumed silica.
                  Moreover, properties of the PBT powders obtained along the process chain are thoroughly characterized with respect to structure and crystallinity by infrared spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction and differential scanning calorimetry. The effect of flowability, shape and bulk density on the powders’ processabilities in LBM is assessed by characterization of the quality of thin layers built in a LBM device. It is demonstrated that the device quality is strongly determined by particle properties: powders of good flowability and high bulk density are mandatory to obtain dense devices.final particle radius (viscous flow sintering model, focal diameter / m E laser beam melting laser power / W polyamide polybutylene terephthalate poly ether ether ketone volume sum distribution / – root mean square roughness stress energy / J sintering time / s measured temperature (downer reactor) / °C melting temperature / °C set temperature (heating of downer reactor) / °C scan speed / m/s stirrer tip speed / m/s particle size / m (mass-specific) heat of fusion / J/kg viscosity / Pa wavelength / m grinding media density / kg/m surface tension / N/m angle of diffraction / ° Additive manufacturing methods allow the tool-free and formless production of complex structures. Especially selective laser beam melting (LBM) of polymers as a generative powder- and beam-based manufacturing process is promising. Several years ago, generative manufacturing methods have been almost exclusively applied in the production of parts at low piece numbers in applications where mechanical properties of the built devices typically were of minor importance (rapid prototyping). With the advent of additive manufacturing, i.e. the application of generative methods in mass production – commonly referred to as ‘3D printing’- new requirements with respect to process stability and robustness, mechanical properties of the devices, as well as new demands concerning the powder materials used in beam- and powder-based additive manufacturing methods have been defined ( To further extend the applications of LBM new and cheap materials with good processability must be supplied: device quality, LBM processability and powder properties ( Wet grinding as a top-down approach is established for the production of micro- and even nanoparticles for a variety of materials ( Within this contribution the process chain is applied to produce spherical polybutylene terephthalate (PBT) powders of good flowability and processability. To our knowledge at present optimized PBT powders are not available for laser beam melting of polymers. However, this semi-crystalline thermoplastic shows good mechanical properties (e.g. impact resistance) and, thus, is of potential interest for LBM in a variety of applications, e.g. in the automotive industries. The PBT product particles are thoroughly characterized with respect to both, powder properties and polymer structure: Powder flowability is assessed by means of tensile strength measurements. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), infrared (IR) spectroscopy and X-ray diffraction (XRD) are applied to monitor the structural evolution of the polymer along the process chain. An improvement of flowability by a factor of about 5 is achieved by subsequent rounding of the comminution product and dry coating as proven by tensile strength measurements of the powders. Moreover, only minor changes in crystallinity of the semi-crystalline polymer have been observed, which is of importance for the mechanical properties of components built via LBM. The processability ( As raw material PBT 4520 Ultradur Highspeed (BASF) of a density of 1.30 A micro-particulate PBT powder consisting of irregular, plate-like PBT microparticles referred to as ’ground PBT’ was produced by wet comminution. Rounded PBT microparticles referred to as ’rounded PBT’ were obtained by rounding ground PBT using a heated downer reactor. Finally, PBT microparticles of improved flowability referred to as ‘rounded & dry coated PBT’ were produced by dry coating of rounded PBT powder with fumed silica. The processes applied to obtain the aforementioned powders and the powder characteristics are outlined in detail in the experimental and the results section ( Denatured ethanol (95%, VWR) has been used as solvent in wet grinding. Fumed silica (Evonik Industries) with a primary particle size of about 7 Particle size distributions of the produced powders were determined by laser diffraction particle sizing using a Mastersizer 2000/Hydro 2000S (Malvern). In the case of wet grinding, the ethanolic product suspensions have been diluted as appropriate prior to measurement in the dispersing unit using an aqueous sodium dodecyl sulfate solution (SDS, 98% (Merck)) to ensure dispersion stability. Dry samples after size reduction or rounding have been dispersed in an aqueous SDS solution as well. Prior to particle sizing ultrasonication of the dispersions has been performed. The polymer particles have been characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Gemini Ultra 55 (Zeiss) device equipped with a through-the-hole detector. An acceleration voltage of 1 Flowability of the products was assessed using a tensile strength tester ( Infrared (IR) spectra were recorded in transmission in the spectral range from 4000 Characterization by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was performed at a heating rate of 20 Structural analysis of the polymers by means of powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed using a Bruker AXS D8 Advance diffractometer. The device was equipped with a VANTEC-1 detector and a Ni filter. Cu K Density was determined using the Helium pycnometer AccuPyc 1330 (Micromeritics). Reported values for densities are the average from three independent determinations. To assess the powder deposition behavior of the different PBT powders doctor blading was applied. A Quadruple Film Applicator Model 360 (Erichsen) was used. The gap size was 120 To characterize the quality of thin layers built via selective laser beam melting of polymers in terms of the layers’ root mean square (rms) roughnesses, a tactile profilometer DektakXT (Bruker) was applied. The scan speed was 100 A coarse PBT powder of size x Wet grinding experiments have been performed using a batch stirred media mill PE5 (Netzsch) equipped with a three-disc stirrer. The stirrer discs are made of polyethylene and the volume chamber of the stirred media mill is lined with silicon nitride ceramics. A mass fraction of about 18.5% of PBT feed material ‘PBT<0.5 Approximately 14.3 The rounding was performed in a heated downer reactor made of stainless steel with a diameter of 100 The temperature profile along the reactor height depicted in Dry particle coating was performed using a tumbling mixer (T2F, Willy A. Bachofen AG). The polymer host particles were mixed at 72 To assess the LBM processability thin layer specimens of 24 With respect to finer product particles wet grinding of polymers ( The behavior of wet-ground PBT powder in laser beam melting of polymers has been studied for the product ‘ground PBT’ of particle size x For rounding the temperature profile given in The main influencing parameters are the surface tension σ and the melt viscosity η of the polymer. Taking typical material parameters of PBT into account, i.e. a surface tension of the melt of σ=30.2 The rounded PBT already shows improved flowability and higher bulk density as compared to the ground PBT (see The effect of rounding and subsequent dry coating on the flowability of the powders has been studied using a tensile strength tester. In short, the device allows to assess interparticulate forces by measurement of the force needed to separate two adjacent layers of particles. For details on the procedure please refer to ( Tensile strengths of powders obtained after the single process steps are summarized in The PBT powder produced by wet grinding (ground PBT) shows a high tensile strength of around 16 Besides tensile strength measurements also a quantitative evaluation of powder deposition by doctor blading and image analysis was performed which gives the possibility to assess the processability of the powders during the application of a new powder layer in LBM. The influence of bulk material properties on device quality is reflected by photographs of thin layer specimen obtained for ground, rounded and rounded & dry coated PBT powder by laser beam melting of polymers shown in Also the characteristics of layers built via LBM directly correlate with the powder properties. Good flowability and high bulk density are a prerequisite for dense devices with a smooth surface. Besides bulk material properties also the polymer structure will influence the LBM processability. Especially the degree of crystallinity is relevant for LBM processing. Structural changes of the material along the process chain have been monitored by dynamic scanning calorimetry, X-ray diffraction and infrared spectroscopy (see Enthalpies of fusion ΔH No significant change of crystallinity during wet grinding is observed: an amount of 34.3–36.3 Polybutylene terephthalate is known to exist as two polymorphs (α and β form) ( The XRD pattern of the feed material (PBT<0.5 The aforementioned structural changes are anticipated to be of minor importance with respect to the mechanical properties of the devices obtained by LBM because the device properties are rather determined by the degree of crystallinity than by the polymorph. The XRD patterns of thin layer devices built via LBM from different PBT powders are depicted in A process chain consisting of wet grinding, rounding in a heated downer reactor and dry coating has been applied to produce PBT powders of good flowability for laser beam melting of polymers. A thorough study on the structure of the polymer along the process chain as well as on the correlation between particle shape, tensile strength of the respective powders, bulk density and quality of thin layer specimens obtained via LBM has been performed. The first step, wet comminution allows for tailoring the particle size without changing the crystallinity or structure of the PBT feed material as proven by DSC and XRD. A remarkable reduction of tensile strength of the powders is achieved by rounding. The change of the particle shape is accompanied by formation of some β-PBT which presumably is formed during the solidification of the polymer melt upon fast cooling. Dry coating, which is the third step, leads to a further decrease of powder tensile strength, i.e. improvement of powder flowability. An overall increase of flowability by a factor of 5 is accomplished by the change of the particle shape (rounding) and reduction of interparticulate van der Waals forces by dry coating of the particles. The LBM processability of rounded and rounded & dry coated PBT powders has been demonstrated by thin layer specimens: for ground PBT powders only porous structures are obtained in LBM. The powders of improved flowability allow for dense parts of good surface quality. A correlation between particle shape, tensile strength of the respective powder, bulk density and thin layer quality has been demonstrated: Powders of good flowability and high bulk density are a prerequisite for parts of good quality. For rounded and dry coated PBT powder dense specimen of small rms roughness are obtained. The process chain to produce spherical polymer powders of good flowability is versatile: all processes are scalable, i.e. the process chain can be transferred to the plant scale for production. Moreover, it may be applied to any polymer which may be comminuted and molten without degradation, i.e. it is applicable to a wide range of thermoplasts and therefore an option to widen the material spectrum of polymer powders for LBM.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 