Competitive flotation of Zn(II) and Cd(II) ions from dilute aqueous solutions (c
                     Me
                     =1×10−5
                     M), by a series of lipophilic proton-ionizable lariat ethers varying ring sizes in the presence of nonylphenol(nonylethylene glycol) ether as the nonionic foaming agent is reported. The influence of the rings size variations from DB-13-C-4 through DB-16-C-5 to DB-19-C-6 on separation of zinc and cadmium ions is discussed. The influences of structural variation within the lariat ether, concentration of the macrocycle, and pH of the aqueous solution is presented. An effect of alkali metal cations, i.e. Li+, Na+ and K+, on Zn(II) and Cd(II) ion flotation removal is also reported. It was shown, that the removal of Zn2+ and Cd2+ increases with increase of pH value and decreases with alkali metal cations concentration increase in aqueous solutions.Since introduction of macrocyclic ligands three decades ago by Pedersen, the design, synthesis and their evaluation for metal ion recognition has received increasing attention Ion flotation is a separation method known since the early 1960s, and can be effective for removal of ionic species from dilute aqueous solutions ( In a few studies, macrocyclic compounds have been utilized in metal species separation by ion flotation. Koide et al. In other approach, Charewicz et al. Competitive flotation of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) ions from dilute aqueous solutions by side-armed lariat ether-type derivatives of diphosphaza-16-crown-6 ethers in the presence of nonylphenol nonylethylene glycol ether as the nonionic foaming agent was investigated by Ulewicz et al. Separation of cadmium(II) over zinc(II) was studied by few researches using such physicochemical methods as solvent extraction, transport across liquid membranes and ion-exchange systems. The solvent extraction of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) with neutral crown ethers was investigated by Katsua et al. The selectivity of Zn The removal of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) from synthetic aqueous mixtures has been investigated applying biosorptive flotation method We now present results for competitive ion flotation of Zn(II) and Cd(II) from dilute aqueous solutions ( The aqueous solutions were prepared with doubly distilled water of 0.1 Syntheses of proton-ionizable lariat ethers The flotation experiments were conducted in a glass column 45.7 The selectivity coefficient ( In our recent paper Flotation kinetic curves of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) cations with lariat ether The effect of varying lariat ethers The influence of pH of the aqueous solutions for competitive flotation of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) (1.0 The practical meaning of zinc(II) and cadmium(II) removal strongly depends on ionic strength of the aqueous solutions. Therefore, the influence of lithium, sodium and potassium chlorides concentration on zinc(II) and cadmium(II) removal was studied, and results obtained are presented in Comparing the best obtained selectivity coefficients for removal with lariat ethers Proton-ionizable lariat ethers