The formation of desilication products (DSPs) is an important process in the pre-desilication step of the Bayer process, helping to limit the potential for unwanted scale on the heat exchangers by limiting the amount of silicate in the Bayer liquor. These solids generally have a crystalline sodalite structure, however, the fundamentals of crystallization are still to be fully understood. We show in this work that the DSP formed is initially amorphous when solution silicate is used. When kaolinite solids are present DSP is initially heterogeneously nucleated on the kaolinite but there is also a secondary nucleation event that occurs.The Bayer process is the most commonly used method of refining bauxite to alumina worldwide. It is an essentially simple method whereby aluminium bearing minerals are dissolved in concentrated caustic and once the gangue is removed, gibbsite is precipitated before being calcined to alumina ( Desilication products (DSPs) form in the Bayer process due to the dissolution of these soluble clays reacting with the aluminate from the Bayer liquor to form less soluble crystalline aluminosilicates ( Previous work in this area found that the formation of DSP is thought to be in the sequence shown below ( This work attempts to understand the process of DSP formation at a fundamental level. What are the mechanisms of nucleation and growth of DSP from both liquid and solid silicate sources? How does the formation of DSP from kaolinite proceed? All the materials and methods other than the atomic force microscopy (AFM) method has been previously discussed in Sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate and sodium sulfate (AR grade, Aldrich) were used to make the synthetic liquor. This involved initially dissolving the sodium hydroxide into water and subsequently adding gibbsite (C33, Alcoa of Arkansas, Pty. Ltd.). The slurry was heated to dissolve all the solids. Sodium carbonate (30 The spent liquor was analysed using the method of total caustic (NaOH Al content expressed as equivalent alumina (g/L Al caustic ratio of A and C (gives an indication of the saturation state of the liquor) An A/C value of 0.3 is indicative of a spent liquor in the plant situation. In addition, as mentioned above, 10 Pure caustic having a C The UV–vis method developed has been previously described ( Caustic or Bayer liquor (300  A NanoZS (Malvern) was used to measure the particle number and size remaining in solution after removal of the larger kaolinite particles. The slurry was sampled during a kaolinite dissolution experiment at different times and the kaolinite particles removed by filtration through a 0.2 The turbidity results ( It is clear that as the concentration of waterglass is increased, so too does the final size of the particles formed ( XRD of the solids formed at the higher waterglass contents taken and filtered at 10 The SEM of the solids at 10 The behaviour of metasilicate solution is similar to waterglass solution but slightly different. As can be seen ( At 90 In addition we can look at the crystallinity of the products using XRD. As found for waterglass, the initial precipitate formed when metasilicate solution is added is an amorphous product (see Thus, the kinetics of the amorphous to crystalline transformation appears to determine whether the amorphous phase is observed. Thus, for industrial situations at ~ We can conclude therefore, that the observation of a crystalline phase such as zeolite A ( The dissolution of kaolinite in Bayer liquors is dependent on the free caustic. The free caustic takes into consideration that 1 mole of caustic is required to dissolve 1 mole of gibbsite according to: Thus: When the initial A/C (0.4) was kept constant but the initial free caustic strength was altered the results in When the initial free caustic level is kept constant, the rate of kaolinite dissolution is also constant but now we see DSP crystallization occurring at an A/C The increase in turbidity at 90 As seen in the SEM images in In addition, we can be confident that the kaolinite to DSP transformation is not a solid-state transformation due to the obvious signs of kaolin dissolution in caustic (see supplementary information, Fig. S7). An attempt was made to determine the nuclei size and number from DLS measurements using the same conditions (90 The solids were imaged using the tapping mode capability as well as the contact mode. This allows both height and phase images to be obtained. The phase image is interesting in that it will be impacted by the physical properties of the solid, e.g. hardness. The Mohs hardness for mica is 2–3, kaolin is 2–2.5 and sodalite/nosean is 5–6 ( However, in these In conclusion, we have shown that for the soluble sources of silicate in solution, the formation of DSP is initially through an amorphous phase. This amorphous phase can be observed up to least 10 The work presented here gives confirmation that high aluminate concentrations stabilise aluminosilicate in solution somewhat. However, the fact that silicate is also more soluble in pure caustic leads to the conclusion that there is a minimum aluminosilicate solubility at low aluminate concentrations. SEM images clearly show that DSP is originally formed on the surface of the dissolving kaolinite, meaning that the first stage of DSP formation is a heterogenous nucleation stage. However, as more kaolinite dissolves these DSP nuclei are released into solution and more nuclei form, leading to an overall secondary nucleation mechanism. Finally, AFM shows that the dissolution of the kaolinite and subsequent formation of DSP is not observable by measuring hardness changes (tapping mode) and therefore may involve the formation of an amorphous surface layer (making the surface softer than the DSP bulk). F. Jones and P. Smith gratefully acknowledge that this research has been supported under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) Program, through the AJ Parker CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at