The effect of the depressant galactomannan (KGM) on the depression of talc and the flotation of a nickel–copper sulfide ore have been investigated through microflotation, batch flotation and industrial flotation tests, zeta potential and infrared spectrum measurements. The flotation results indicated that KGM had a straining influence on the depression of talc while had little effect on nickel minerals flotation. Compared with the depressant carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) and guar gum, the KGM increased the nickel recovery dramatically, it not only negated the need for a talc removal process, but also achieved a significant decrease in the depressant consumption by half. Zeta-potential and infrared spectrum measurements illustrated that chemical adsorption was seen between KGM and talc, and a possible weak physical adsorption was seen between KGM and pentlandite. This was the reason why KGM had high depression selectivity for talc and little depression effect on nickel minerals.Talc is the most common hydrophobic mineral encountered in complex nickel sulfide ore and in the ore of platinum group metals ( Depressants play an important role in affecting selective separation of nickel minerals from ores by flotation. Polysaccharides and their derivatives are depressants for talc and other magnesia-bearing minerals. There are numerous reports ( Technological innovations have been made and the introduction of amorphophallus products into the minerals processing industry have been successful. Galactomannan (KGM) is made from the root of the amorphophallus or trigonella plants and is a new high molecular weight polysaccharide, used as a powerful water-soluble dietary fiber supplement in food additives, medicine, chemicals, etc. ( Thus in the present study, the galactomannan (KGM) was developed as a depressant by the authors to depress talc effectively, and the depressing performance of KGM was compared with guar gum and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC) in the flotation of nickel–copper minerals from a low-grade Ni/Cu sulfide ore which contains talc, in the Danba Nickel–copper Mine. In addition, the adsorption mechanisms of KGM on pentlandite and talc were investigated by zeta potential measurements and infrared spectrum analysis. The pure mineral samples of pentlandite and talc were obtained from the Danba Nickel–copper Mine, Sichuan Province, China. The samples were crushed, handpicked and then dry-ground with a porcelain ball mill and dry-sieved to obtain different size fractions. The (−150 The low-grade Ni/Cu sulfide ore (containing talc) for batch flotation and industrial flotation tests was also from the Danba Nickel–copper Mine. The multi-elemental chemical analysis of the ore was conducted by Atomic Adsorption Spectroscopy (AAS) and Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES), and the analysis results are shown in The depressant galactomannan [KGM, structure (C In the microflotation tests, KGM was used as depressant, sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) was used as collector, methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was used as frother, and hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as pH regulators. All reagents used in microflotation tests were of analytical grade. Deionized double distilled water was used for microflotation, zeta-potential and infrared spectra experiments. In batch flotation tests, KGM, guar gum, carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), dextrin, lime and sodium fluorosilicate were used as depressant, oxalic acid and sulfurous acid were used as pH regulators. PAX, ammonium dibutyl dithiophosphate (ABDTP) and ethyl thiocyanate were used as collector. Activated carbon was used as adsorbent, and MIBC was used as frother. All reagents (except KGM) used in batch flotation were of industrial grade. Tap water was used for batch flotation tests. A flotation machine of XFG-1600 type (mechanical agitation) with the volume of 40 In the batch flotation tests, the ore (1 The industrial tests were performed in the Mineral Processing Plant at the Danba Nickel–copper Mine. The experimental system M1 used KGM as depressant in the flotation. The flotation flowsheet (dash circled) of the industrial tests is described in The zeta potential of pentlandite and talc were measured by a Coulter DELSA440S II Type electro-kinetic instrument in a solution of KNO 1.0   On the basis of single mineral flotation tests, the selective flotation tests of mixed minerals were conducted under the condition of pH 6.5, SIBX 0.1 According to the results of microflotation tests, it can be inferred that the flotation separation of nickel–copper minerals from a Ni/Cu sulfide ores which contains talc was possible with KGM as depressant. Under the flotation condition of particle size distribution (76.7%–74 Under the flotation condition of sodium fluorosilicate 900 Based on the optimized flotation conditions and open circuit tests, the bench-scale locked cycle tests from Ni/Cu bulk flotation to Ni/Cu flotation separation were performed were carried out. The flotation flowsheet and corresponding flotation conditions are listed in Because of the good depression performance for talc, KGM was selected in the industrial tests performed in the Mineral Processing Plant of Danba Nickel–copper Mine. The flotation flowsheet and flotation conditions are listed in In order to investigate the reason for the depressant KGM selectively effect on talc, one needs to evaluate how KGM interacts with the talc and pentlandite particles. To ascertain this, the zeta-potential and infrared spectrum of mineral particles before and after interacting with KGM were analyzed ( The zeta-potential of talc untreated and treated with KGM as a function of pH are shown in  The FT-IR spectra of KGM and talc before and after interacting with 25 The results also indicated that after the talc was treated with KGM, a strong sharp band of –OH appeared near 3413   Microflotation tests indicated that the depressant KGM had a weak effect on pentlandite flotation, while it could effectively depress the easy-floating talc. The results of locked cycle tests indicated that the effective flotation separation of nickel–copper minerals from the Ni/Cu sulfide ore was realized by using KGM as depressant. Compared with guar gum, the KGM increased the recovery of nickel in nickel concentrates by 2.61% and copper in copper concentrates by 4.18%. The industrial flotation results indicated that KGM was a high performance depressant for the depression of talc. Compared with the original plant setup (CMC), the KGM decreased the depressant consumption by half, negating the need for a talc removal process. It not only realized the separation of nickel/copper minerals, but also increased the recovery of nickel (18.15%) and copper (18.02%). Zeta-potential and infrared spectrum analysis indicated that KGM could selectively and strongly adsorb on talc surfaces through chemical adsorption while a weak physical adsorption happened between KGM and pentlandite. This was the reason why KGM had high depression selectivity for talc and little depression effect on nickel–copper minerals. The authors would like to thank the