Thermodynamic calculations and electrochemical measurements were employed to establish a mathematic model for predicting the optimum redox potential in chalcopyrite leaching at 318K. The proposed model revealed that the optimum redox potential mainly depended on the temperature as well as the concentrations of Cu2+ and Fe2+. Chemical leaching (ferric leaching) of chalcopyrite indicated that the proposed model was accurate, from which the optimum redox potential of bioleaching of chalcopyrite can also be accurately predicted. Based on the model, the redox potential should be maintained at an optimum potential range (EL–EH) to obtain a high leaching efficiency. Moreover, the addition of Cu2+ and Fe2+ accelerated the dissolution of chalcopyrite remarkably at the initial stage of bioleaching, but the further dissolution was inhibited owing to the jarosite formed during the bioleaching process. Therefore, Cu2+ and Fe2+ should be added periodically to prevent the rapid formation of jarosite and enhance the bioleaching efficiency.Currently, high grade copper resources have been extensively exploited, leaving behind low grade copper ores which are difficult and costly to be processed with traditional technologies ( The dissolution process of chalcopyrite during bioleaching involves complicated oxidation–reduction reactions, which varies with the changes of solution compositions. Ferric ions act as the main oxidant in both chemical leaching (ferric leaching) and bioleaching ( The above chemical reactions are mainly determined by redox potentials, concentrations of ferric ions, ferrous ions and cupric ions. These factors can be controlled to enhance the above chemical reactions, thus accelerating the kinetics of chalcopyrite dissolution. Therefore, the present work is aimed to study the optimum redox potential in both chemical leaching (ferric leaching) and bioleaching of chalcopyrite, and the effects of solution compositions on the optimum redox potential were further investigated. Chalcopyrite samples were obtained from the geological museum of Guangxi Province of China. X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) showed that it was of extremely high purity. Chemical analysis indicated that it contained 34.46% Cu, 31.53% Fe and 33.12% S (wt.%). Ore samples were ground and sieved to − A conventional three-electrode system consisting of a working electrode, a graphite rod as the counter electrode and a Ag/AgCl (3.0 Chemical leaching experiments were implemented in the basic culture medium with various concentrations of cupric ions, ferrous ions and ferric ions. 50 Moderately thermophilic bacteria, including The bacteria used in bioleaching experiments were previously grown to their exponential growth phase with a cell concentration of higher than 1.0 Concentrations of metal ions were analyzed by an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES) (America Baird Co. PS-6), pH was measured with a pH meter (PHSJ-4A) and the redox potential of leaching solution was measured by a Pt electrode with reference to a Ag/AgCl electrode (3.0 For the reaction of Eq. It was assumed that the redox potential of leaching solution was mainly determined by the Nernst equation of Eq. Based on the above equations, the maximum redox potential for the reaction of Eq. Similarly, the change of Gibbs free energy (ΔG) of Eq. Accompanied with the Nernst equation of Eq. It clearly shows that the critical redox potential of Eq. Additionally, the further oxidation of formed chalcocite (Cu The low critical redox potential (E Similarly, the change of Gibbs free energy (ΔG) of Eq. The critical redox potential (E It can be found that the low critical redox potential (E Actually, redox potential is always higher than the low optimum redox potential (E   The result of linear fitting is provided in To further investigate the interactions of Fe To investigate the effects of sole ferrous ions on the anodic-polarization curves of chalcopyrite, the anodic-polarization measurements were carried out in the absence of Cu To further investigate the effects of Fe Chemical leaching experiments were conducted to verify the accuracy of equations of critical redox potential (E  The presence of Cu     According to the above results, it can be confirmed that the proposed model of critical redox potential was credible and accurate in predicting the optimum redox potential in both chemical leaching and bioleaching of chalcopyrite. The addition of large amount of Cu The optimum redox potential in chemical leaching and bioleaching of chalcopyrite was accurately predicted with a newly proposed mathematic model (Eqs. The addition of Cu This work was supported by the