Trona ore consists mainly of trona, sodium sesquicarbonate dihydrate (Na2CO3·NaHCO3·2H2O), including minor undesirable insoluble materials. With the present industrial practice, there is no particle separation process to remove these insoluble minerals prior to thermochemical processing. In this current research appropriate conditions for trona flotation technology were established from exploratory bench-scale experiments, and the conditions obtained from the bench-scale experiments were also applied to pilot scale flotation tests. In this regard various process variables such as amine dosage, flotation percent solids, amine to oil ratio, pH of amine solution, collector structure, brine composition, feed particle size, etc. were studied to establish the preferred conditions and operating variables for pilot-plant testing. Additional information regarding the mineralogy of the system and collector characteristics is also reported to provide further analysis and explanation.Soda ash (sodium carbonate) is a most important commodity used by many industries such as the glass industry, chemical industry, soap and detergents, pulp and paper, and water treatment industries ( The trona beds occur with layers of oil shale, marlstone, and sandstone/mudstone. These insoluble contaminants include a number of double carbonate salts in addition to dolomitic shale, quartz and clays ( As seen from Removal of insoluble gangue minerals from trona by particle separation processes is not practiced by industry. Nevertheless, research and development efforts have been made to find an appropriate particle separation process for the removal of insoluble gangue minerals prior to traditional thermochemical processing. Some researchers have suggested that gangue minerals can be separated from the trona ore prior to further processing. For example studies on magnetic separation ( Trona is a complex salt of sodium carbonate (Na This paper evaluates the reverse flotation technology for the production of a trona concentrate. The results help to provide a further basis for the development of improved flotation technology for the trona industry. Trona samples for flotation tests were obtained from the plant operated by General Chemical, which processes trona ore from the Green River Formation, Wyoming. First, the samples (specific gravity of trona feed, 2.2 The insoluble minerals in the trona ore were isolated after dissolution and analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) for identification. XRD analyses indicate that the insoluble minerals are composed of mostly quartz, calcite, shortite, dolomite and feldspar. The chemical compositions of the insoluble minerals are given in Armeen 12D (Dodecylamine, C Dodecylamine hydrochloride (DAH) as a surfactant, and kerosene for the oil phase were selected for collector characterization tests. In this study, four different concentrations of aqueous amine solutions were prepared, i.e., 1%, 2%, 3%, and 4% (4.51 Eq. In the case of flotation tests, a 3% by weight amine solution (Armeen 12D) was prepared in distilled water at pH 3. The solution was then stirred using a mixer at 1200–1500 Since trona is soluble in water, a saturated solution of trona was used for the flotation tests to prevent solubilization of the trona particles to be separated from the gangue mineral particles. The preparation of the saturated brine solution for the flotation experiments is very important. At room temperature, the solubility of trona in water is about 20 wt.%. Due to sensitivity of the salt solutions, more than the required amount of ground trona was placed in water (40% solids The analytical method for insoluble mineral analysis of flotation products (concentrate and tailing) was as follows: After drying and weighing, a representative sample (∼25–30%) of product was taken for insoluble mineral analysis. This representative sample was mixed with water and stirred for 1 Bench-scale flotation tests were conducted in a bench-scale Denver flotation machine. In addition, a Denver conditioning machine was used for the conditioning process. The flotation tests were carried out with 150 In the case of the pilot scale flotation tests, the flotation machine shown in The bench-scale flotation procedure was also followed for the pilot scale flotation tests. The trona ore was fed to the conditioning tank through the vibratory feeder at a calculated solids flow rate (50 The droplet size distributions of emulsions were also measured by optical microscopy. The micrographs for these emulsion droplets (DAH and kerosene) are shown in  Electrokinetic properties of the insolubles as revealed from zeta potential measurements provide important information for the understanding of flotation separation processes. In this regard, zeta potential measurements for the insoluble minerals were performed in water and brine to determine the electrophoretic mobility of such samples. Since the trona flotation process must be carried out in its saturated solution, equilibrium electrophoretic measurements were also accomplished for floor and roof shale in brine. As seen from Bench-scale flotation experiments were conducted in order to establish appropriate flotation conditions and operating variables for pilot-plant testing. It was determined that the successful flotation of insoluble gangue minerals such as dolomite, dolomitic shale, quartz, shortite and clays is possible by proper control of the flotation variables such as particle size, percent solids, collector chemistry and dosages including collector structure, amine dosage, amine to oil ratio and flotation time etc. Some of our flotation results have already been previously presented ( Flotation experiments with respect to particle size of the flotation feed shows that the fine particles play an important role in the flotation of insolubles from trona ore. It can be seen from the The effect of flotation percent solids on the flotation performance is presented in The flotation tests were carried out with 600 The flotation experiments were carried out to determine the effect of amine dosage for different feed grades. Reagent dosages were varied from 2 A few experiments were performed under the same operating conditions mentioned above with different amine concentrations (1%, 2%, 3% and 4%). Excellent separation was obtained with 3% amine solutions. It can be seen in The effect of dry amine to oil ratio (A/O) on the flotation of trona was investigated. Flotation results with different amine to oil ratios indicate that the best concentrate grade is obtained for an A/O ratio of 1:12 for the emulsion. At a dosage of 5 Photographs of the trona concentrate and the insoluble tailings product are presented in The pilot scale flotation experiments were carried out in the mineral processing laboratory at the University of Utah. The trona flotation circuit was installed in such a way as to insure that efficient and reliable flotation experiments could be carried out. The results obtained from this test showed that a trona concentrate of 98% purity (trona content of the feed was 82.2%) was obtained with a recovery of 75.2% using commercial amine with pilot scale flotation equipment. Photographs presented in Results from bench-scale and pilot scale tests are compared in It must be pointed out that although the bench-scale experiments were very good, the flotation separation was not successful for large scale and continuous pilot-plant tests. In fact, there are many factors, such as the flotation machine and processing variables (solids concentration, size distribution or reagent dosage) that can affect the flotation process from small scale to large scale. In our case, the conditioning parameters, such as particle size distribution, conditioning strength, and uniformity were well controlled when the bench-scale experiments were conducted. In the large scale flotation tests, we used the parameters obtained from the bench-scale flotation experiments. For scale up, some of the conditions might not have been satisfied. In addition, during the conditioning a lot of fine particles might be generated in the large scale flotation experiments. It was thought that this new flotation technology could be easily integrated into the traditional sesquicarbonate process which uses trona ore typically containing 80% trona. In this case, the high quality trona concentrate (2–4% insolubles) from the flotation process could be sent to the existing plant so that the existing process efficiency and capacity would be increased significantly. It can be concluded from these results that reverse flotation of trona can be used for the production of a high quality trona concentrate (more than 99%) under optimum operating conditions. The present flotation process can yield a trona concentrate composed of up to 96% or even 99% trona. These results may indicate that the flotation response of the insolubles in trona brine mostly depends on the conditioning process or wetting/spreading of the emulsion on the insoluble surface. In order to prove this, the solution chemistry for the trona system must be considered in more detail to improve flotation technology for the trona industry. In addition, the scale up problem is not clear and more research work should be conducted to optimize the scale up parameters. As a result, improvement of this new technology could allow for better productivity and the development of a new product for the marketplace. The authors wish to recognize the financial support provided by CAST (Center for Advanced Separation Technologies) and the Office of Basic Sciences, DOE. In addition, General Chemical is highly appreciated for their support during this project. Finally, appreciation is extended to Ms. Dorrie Spurlock for diligent review of the manuscript.