Mineral carbonation has enormous potential for carbon capture and storage (CCS). CO2 is a greenhouse gas that can be converted into environmentally stable products through mineral carbonation, which has been pointed out as the most promising technology to reduce CO2 emissions and environmental impacts generated therefrom. Thus, this study presents an overview of the state of the art in terms of mineral carbonation research conducted between 2002 and 2018 with the aim of analyzing its evolution so as to identify the main scientific challenges in literature to indicate future research on it. The results reveal an increase in the number of publications and citations during the period under study and that there has been a fivefold increase in publications and citations on average in the latest five years. The analyzed works have made use of different kinds of industrial waste as raw material for mineral carbonation, whose most widely studied products were mining waste, Coal fly ash and Steelmaking slag. Mining waste is the most commonly studied material, which presents the greatest potential for mineral carbonation. Analyzes of recent articles have revealed that many challenges are yet to be overcome, such as the deployment of industrial carbonation technologies, mostly those that increase the efficiency of converting CO2 into carbonates and reduce its overall budget. Thus, further studies are needed with the aim of increasing the process reaction rate, reducing the use of chemical reagents and defining the mineralogical characteristics of raw materials in order to determine an ideal raw material for carbonation processes and analyze the market and profitability of products generated through mineral carbonation.Fossil fuels are important energy sources, which account for 80–85% of energy consumption worldwide. They offer advantages such as abundance in supply, high energy density, ease of use and storage, large existing infrastructure and low cost ( Despite its importance in the global energy grid, there are great challenges to be faced on the use of fossil fuels due to a large amount of carbon dioxide (CO Thus, the climate system is showing obvious signs of global warming, which leads to average increases in ocean and air temperatures as well as average sea levels. From these climate changes, other differences have been observed in many natural systems, such as agricultural and hunting activities in Arctic regions, which is expected to become even more intense ( Changes in GHG concentrations are the main factors contributing to temperature increase, and steam and CO A reduction in GHG emissions and mitigation of negative impacts of climate change are urgent challenges, as mathematical models estimate a 1.1–6.4 K increase in global temperatures in this century and a probable increase of 0.18–0.59 m in global average sea levels ( Given this scenario, it is of paramount importance to introduce technologies that reduce CO CCS technologies offer a promising solution to make industrial processes sustainable and benefit future generations ( Mineral sequestration, otherwise known as mineral carbonation, aims at chemically converting CO In mineral carbonation, industrial waste can be used as raw material for the extraction of minerals that will react with CO CO Given the importance of mineral carbonation for CO The main disadvantage of mineral carbonation processes is their high operation costs due to the consumption of large amounts of energy and chemical products, thus making it unfeasible to be rolled out on an industrial scale ( Mineral carbonation is based on a natural process of CO Industrial mineral carbonation is a similar process to natural CO On the other hand, mineral sequestration forms solid inorganic carbonates (MCO There is a variety of elements that can react with CO Materials with highly pure alkaline earth metals in their composition are rarely found in nature. However, there is a vast amount of silicate rocks containing these metals worldwide ( The mineral carbonation process can be mainly performed through different routes (  When compared to the A recent analysis of challenges and accomplishments of the CarbFix project, i.e. a pilot plant of According to  The  Indirect aqueous mineral carbonation has been described in literature as a promising alternative to be used in mineral carbonation processes in which silicate dissolution hinders the process ( The main products obtained from mineral carbonation are described in A literature review has been carried out through the Its methodology stages are presented in Afterwards, an analysis of articles citing “mineral carbonation” has been carried out so as to broaden knowledge about researches on mineral carbonation by assessing the 10 most cited articles in literature. Finally, articles published in the latest 4 years (2015/2016/2017/2018) have been analyzed with the aim of identifying gaps in literature and offering suggestions for future research. An analysis of the evolution of the number of publications on mineral carbonation for CO The results also reveal that there has been growing interest in research on mineral carbonation for CO A more relevant aspect is the number of citations. Between 2002 and 2012, there were 54 citations per year on average. During the latest 5 years (2014–2018), it should be noted that the total number of citations was around 480 per year, i.e. approximately 9 times as many citations as in the earlier period. In addition, it was observed that the mineral carbonation impact factor (IF), which is calculated by the ratio between the number of citations and publications during the period ranging from 2013 to 2018 (IF = 5.2), is twice as much as between 2002 and 2012 (IF = 2.2). An analysis of 117 works published between 2002 and 2018 has revealed that 53% of research on mineral carbonation has made use of minerals present in rock formations as raw materials, such as olivine, basalt and serpentine, which are the most commonly used in researches. In 14% of studies, steelmaking slag was used as raw material for mineral extraction and CO Between 2002 and 2011, the development of carbonation processes through their different routes, mainly using rock formations, has been the most widely discussed subject in publications. Between 2012 and 2014, there was an increase in the number of researches using industrial waste as raw material, such as steelmaking slag and coal ash. From 2014, researches using minerals obtained from rock formations were once again the majority. It should be emphasized that out of the 117 papers, only 6% are focused on literature reviews (       A recent review of CO An analysis of countries that have the highest number of publications about mineral carbonation has been carried out. China also leads the rankings of CO The United Kingdom is the second country with the largest number of publications on mineral carbonation, accounting for 11% of publications. Although the number of publications compared to China is lower, the United Kingdom publication IF is approximately 5 times greater than the Chinese publications (IF = 49.8). The main research lines in the UK deal with processes of mineral carbonation from serpentinite rocks, industrial waste as steel slag and the process of recovery of the chemicals used in the carbonation processes ( The United States (U.S.) accounts for only 8.5% of publications, though the country has the largest impact factor of carbonation surveys (IF = 109.4). The research lines of interest in the U.S. involve direct mineral carbonation in magnesium-rich minerals, mineral carbonation in peridotite and aqueous olivine mineral carbonation ( Brazil has 4 publications on mineral carbonation in the period of the 2002–2018. Although there are very few researches in comparison with developed countries, it is the only South American country to publish studies about mineral carbonation. The Brazilian research line is concentrated in the process of direct and indirect mineral carbonation of serpentinite rocks and mining residues, the IF of the Brazilian publications being equal 5.25. Potential of mineral carbonation using Brazilian metamafic and metaultramafic rocks has been evaluated by Among the ten most cited articles, it is worth mentioning four distinct categories of studies that present different types of contributions: Mineral carbonation using steelmaking slag, coal fly ash, literature review and direct and indirect mineral carbonation. In general, literature review articles obtain more citations on account of presenting conclusions and guidance for original research. Thus, among the 10 most cited articles, literature review studies have been presented separately. The 10 most cited articles on mineral carbonation, subdivided into literature review articles and original researches, are presented in In the overall rankings, an original research entitled “Mineral CO  Among the 10 most cited articles, four are reviews on mineral carbonation processes ( Fluid or gaseous CO In addition,  In the rankings of the 10 most cited articles, 4 have used minerals as raw material for carbonation. Indirect The materials that have been most commonly studied in the latest years were mining waste, coal fly ash and steelmaking slag. Thus, the main lines of future research for these materials are presented in Mining waste is the most widely studied material in mineral carbonation, but there are some gaps that must be filled in towards its development so that it can be implemented on an industrial scale.   According to    The analyzed works indicate that carbonation by the pH-swing method is the most efficient for processes using mining waste as raw material. Its method was developed with the aim of improving the overall CO A few works in literature on indirect mineral carbonation show that the highest carbonation efficiencies were observed when using the pH-swing method ( Other alkaline industrial wastes such as fly ash should also be considered as a source of calcium or magnesium for carbonation. Studies using fly ash from coal as raw material also indicate lines of research that should be considered to implement carbonation on an industrial scale. Future research should be undertaken on an economic analysis of the process with the aim of improving the efficiency of capture, separation, economic feasibility and effectiveness of the process (    As coal ash, steel slag is also an industrial waste that can be used for CO     Other wastes were also evaluated as raw material for CO   An analysis of published research over the past four years indicates that mineral carbonation is a promising technology to reduce CO Due to a lack of commercial applications, estimates of mineral carbonation costs reported in literature have been based on laboratory experiments or pilot scale projects. The main energy expenditures are associated with plant size, pre-treatment, operation conditions (e.g. mixture, temperature and pressure), use of additives and separation of reaction products ( Different strategies to enable the process implementation on an industrial scale have been studied in recent decades. However, the high cost involved in the mineral carbonation process is a limiting factor to its adoption on a large scale ( In a mining process, the cost of handling and storing residues in the process represents 1.5% to 3.5% of operation costs. The use of mining waste in CO According to Methods to overcome limitations of the mineral carbonation process have been studied in order to reduce its costs. According to On the other hand, according to With respect to the use of various materials for mineral carbonation, it is worth mentioning that using waste is an alternative that would reduce the process costs. According to When considering industrial residues such as steelmaking slag and construction waste as a raw material for mineral carbonation, the cost of the process by the direct aqueous mineral carbonation ranges from $8–104 per tonne of CO A net reduction in the amount of CO An analysis of future perspectives on mineral carbonation presented by The present study presents a data analysis of the evolution of research on mineral carbonation by identifying the main contributions and gaps in literature. An evaluation of publications, citations and the 10 most cited articles has been carried out, thus demonstrating its importance for future research. Between 2002 and 2018, the three most widely used raw materials in mineral carbonation processes were: mining waste, coal fly ash and Steelmaking slag. Among the main raw materials, mining waste stands out on account of presenting a higher concentration of alkali metals, such as Mg, Ca and Fe, thus it has higher carbonation potential if compared to other raw materials. However, they can present different mineralogical structures that influence the mineral carbonation process differently. Thus, future studies aimed to determine the influence of mineralogical factors on mineral carbonation are required. Among the different routes of the carbonation process, Research shows that the sale of carbon credits generated through a balance between captured CO Although research on mineral carbonation for CO This study has been partly financed by the