Bone healing is a predictable process that has a high rate of success. For some patients, and in certain clinical settings, this process can be delayed or completely inhibited. This leads to significant morbidity and may also result in time lost from work, costs related to prolonged medical treatment, and continued pain at the site of nonunion or failed spinal fusion. Several growth factors, specifically BMP-2 and BMP-7, have been approved in several countries for specific indications. The use of these products and potential complications of their use are reviewed.Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) belong to the transforming growth factor (TGF)β superfamily of proteins and are known to be active in multiple growth and differentiation processes TGFβ members bind to and activate serine/threonine kinase cell surface receptors that then initiate various intracellular signaling cascades There has been some confusion in the literature over the subclassification of the various TGFβ members as several molecules have multiple names and were initially classified into subfamilies based on activity or sequence homology alone. BMP 1 is an extracellular metalloproteinase that has a role in the activation of TGFβ members, including BMP 2 and BMP 4, and is related to the tolloid metalloproteinases Specific members of the BMP/GDF subgroup are known to be involved in bone and cartilage formation. All of the BMPs except for BMPs 1, 3 and 12 have the ability to induce alkaline phosphatase in osteoblastic cells. Other studies have shown various abilities of these growth factors to induce bone formation, with BMPs 2, 6, 7, and 9 having the most robust ability to form new bone in a mouse orthotopic model Several growth factors are currently under investigation as potential supplements for enhancing bone regeneration. Some of these molecules have shown significant promise in animal studies, but once clinical trials begin, the molecule fails to show significant clinical effects The different mechanisms for approval have important implications on how a drug or device can be used and marketed. In the case of rhBMP 2 (Infuse™, Medtronic Sofamor Danek. Inc, Minneapolis, MN), PMAs were granted for spinal fusion procedures in skeletally mature patients with degenerative disc disease at one level from L4–S1 Fractures have a high propensity for healing; however, several factors can have deleterious effects on this process. Smoking, older age, and open fractures all pose special problems for healing, and can result in delayed union or non-union OP-1 was first shown by Makino at al. to induce fracture healing in a series of experiments using an animal model for non-union. Fractures were created in rat femora and the periosteum was then removed. The animals then received a single dose of either rhOP-1 in a rat-tail collagen vehicle or vehicle only. By six weeks all of the animals treated with rhOP-1 had healed, while all control fractures had failed to unite The promising results in animals led to several clinical trials. Friedlaender et al. Other studies in both the pelvis and humerus, while smaller, also reported promising results. Bong et al. found no difference in the rate of union in 23 patients with humeral atrophic non-unions treated with surgical fixation augmented with either bone graft or demineralized bone matrix (DBM) containing 3.5 Other studies have found similar results, but the majority of cases failed to achieve union in all subjects with either method OP-1 has also been studied in elective surgery in the upper extremity, although the results have not been as promising. Symptomatic dorsal maluion of the distal radius can occur after a distal radius fracture, specifically in elderly patients treated non-operatively and is likely the result of osteoporosis and dorsal comminution Initial studies in spinal fusion surgery were done with OP-1 and autograft for posterolateral fusion in patients with degenerative spondylolisthesis. This condition typically occurs in the lumbar spine and results in forward slippage of the superior vertebrate and variable compression of the associated nerve roots. Results at the earliest follow-up found a union rate of 55%, comparable to historic controls of atuograft only, and no adverse events where recorded Revision surgery for pseudoarthrosis is also a problem in spinal surgery. Based on early studies showing equivalent results with autograft in posterolateral spine fusion, Furlan et al. rhBMP 2, marketed as Infuse™, has been extensively studied in both animals and humans. As mentioned earlier, it has received premarket approval for specific indications in open tibial fractures, anterior single-level lumbar spinal fusion certain oral maxillofacial and dental regeneration applications These studies laid the groundwork for animal studies that focused on the ability of rhBMP 2 to enhance fracture repair. The models for healing involved surgically created segmental defects, in an attempt to recreate situations that have a propensity for non-union. Sciadini and Johnson We have conducted in vivo studies that have shown that a single percutaneous injection of rhBMP 2 was able to accelerate fracture healing of closed mid-shaft femoral fractures in Sprague–Dawley rats The promising results in both rodents and larger mammals led to clinical trials in humans. A large prospective and randomized study using rhBMPs was conducted containing 450 patients who had sustained an open tibial shaft fractures Spinal fusion plays a central role in the management of both traumatic and degenerative processes of the spinal column. The goal is to create a stable spine and in the process reduce nerve and spinal cord compression and pain. The gold standard for these procedures, similar to other orthopaedic procedures, is the use of autograft in the form of iliac crest bone graft (ICBG). However, the morbidity associated with the harvest of this type of graft is significant, with pain, increased blood loss and disability found in a significant number of patients In adults, fusion of the spine can be accomplished from an anterior, posterior or combined approach. The lumbar spine and cervical spine have a higher incidence of arthritis secondary to relative mobility compared to the thoracic spine whose motion is limited by the thoracic cage. In the lumbar spine the choice of approach is dictated by the benefits and risks of each procedure, but the rates of fusion for both techniques have been less than ideal An exception to this is the recent HDE approval of the Infuse/Mastergraft™ for revision posterolateral spinal fusion in cases of pseudoarthrosis The promising results using rhBMP 2 in lumbar spinal fusion have lead to other groups to consider its use in specific clinical settings. Allen et al. Buttermann Complications associated with the use of rhBMP 2 in the cervical spine were confirmed in a retrospective by Shields et al. Adverse events other than edema have also been reported with the use of rhBMP 2, in the spine Complications with the use of BMPs in the appendicular skeleton in patients have mostly been related to heterotopic ossification. The first report of HO after the treatment with OP-1 was by Wysocki and Cohen A recent study raised the issues of both cost and safety for the use of rhBMPs. In a retrospective cohort study of 328,468 patients who underwent spinal fusion procedures between 2002 and 2006, identified from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample database, bone morphogenetic protein was shown to be used extensively and with increasing frequency. Indeed, in 2006 alone, approximately 25% of all spinal fusions involved the use of a BMP, were associated with more frequent complications for use in anterior cervical fusions and were responsible for significantly greater hospital charges for all categories of fusions BMPs have been in clinical use in orthopaedics and spine surgery for nearly a decade. Results indicate that, for most applications, the union rates are comparable or possibly better than with use of autograft. Although off-label use has been associated with a significant risk of complications there are clear clinical benefits with the use of BMPs in situations beyond their current approvals. The clinical scientific community will have to address the safety and benefits of BMP use in all future applications. On the horizon are potentially more potent proteins that have the ability to induce bone formation that is significantly greater than with the current formulations and delivery vehicles used for either BMP 2 or BMP 7. Challenges for the future use of BMPs include improvements in safety and demonstration of efficacy, reduction in cost, and a broadening of the scope of orthopaedic applications such as their use in the treatment of degenerative disc disease and osteoarthritis.