In some hydrometallurgical operations, the removal of iron from process liquors can be critical, with the method of choice commonly being crystallization (precipitation). It has been recently discovered that if the removal of iron occurs at pH 3, ferrihydrite, a complex and disordered compound, will generally be precipitated. A laboratory scale, computer controlled, continuous crystallizer was constructed to investigate the removal of iron from low pH solutions (precipitation). The significance of ferrihydrite precipitation and the effect of pH and silica concentration on the properties of the precipitate were investigated. Considerable insight has been gained concerning the crystallization and growth mechanisms under these conditions, including the unusual limit of ferrihydrite crystal growth. The use of in situ focussed beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) analysis has allowed the particle size differences experienced at low pH in ferrihydrite precipitation to be studied. The improved understanding of the crystallization of iron from hydrometallurgical process liquors has resulted in a methodology for more effective removal of iron.In many hydrometallurgical processes, where there is a need to remove iron from solution, this is usually performed via reactive crystallization (pH alteration) as iron oxy-hydroxides. However, these species often exhibit poor processing characteristics, and it is believed that an increased understanding of the crystallization of iron oxy-hydroxides in hydrometallurgical residues will manifest in economic advantages via process improvement. Achievable benefits would include a more compact residue, with enhanced filtration and settling properties, including a lower moisture content and porosity. It is well known (in areas outside hydrometallurgy) that the iron oxy-hydroxide, ferrihydrite is generally the first product of ferric hydrolysis in acid media Ferrihydrite is a disordered compound that has “short-range” structural order indicated by broad bands (between two and six, depending on the crystallinity) in an X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern. A similar number of rings can also be observed in a transmission electron microscopy selected area diffraction (TEM SAD) pattern, with nano-diffraction providing even greater resolution Ferrihydrite is regarded as being metastable, with the transformation to more crystalline products (goethite and hematite) having a variable time scale In zinc hydrometallurgy, both goethite and hematite are precipitated via oxidation from the ferrous state, whereas jarosite is precipitated from the ferric state. Similarly, in the Paragoethite process The objective of this study is to understand the ferrihydrite precipitation mechanism in a hydrometallurgical residue, and the factors effecting its complex and disordered nature. Ultimately, the effective control of ferrihydrite crystallization may produce a hydrometallurgical residue with advantageous downstream handling properties. Concentrated acidic ZnSO The calcine slurry is agitated in a storage tank and pumped at a fixed rate to achieve the desired residence time. The reactor vessel is filled with calcine slurry filtrate (ZnSO Once the vessel is at temperature (85°C), both pumps are switched on, the process begins and takes six residence times to reach steady state. When the liquor in the vessel reaches the liquor level sensing electrode (LLSE), this begins the product removal cycle, by turning on the product removal pump. Product is removed from the reactor iso-kinetically (for 2 When product is discharged, sampling occurs. Samples are taken for particle size distribution (PSD) analysis (Malvern MasterSizer 2000), settling tests (500 Samples were analysed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Phillips XL30 instrument in backscattered (BSE), secondary electron and energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) modes. Samples were either mounted in epoxy resin, polished and carbon coated, or mounted on aluminium stubs with carbon tape and gold or carbon coated. TEM analysis was performed on a Phillips 430 instrument at 300 FBRM analysis provides rapid on-line, in situ PSD analysis. While the instrument gives a particle chord distribution, the results are comparable to conventional sizing techniques Using the standard precipitation method described above, the residue was found to contain phases from the insoluble component of the calcine (franklinite, willemite, sphalerite and quartz) and also those of precipitated material (ferrihydrite, silica and a solid solution jarosite phase, akin to plumbojarosite). Ferrihydrite particles were observed to be up to 100 Pore size analysis demonstrated that although the residue is significantly micro-porous it also has considerable meso-porosity. Porosity is a dominant feature of ferrihydrite samples ( The aggregated nature of ferrihydrite can be demonstrated by the effect of sonication on the PSD of the residue. For instance, after 20  SEM analysis revealed no striking differences between each residue in terms of the morphology or surface topographies. However, there was a considerably higher percentage of fine material (<10 On a mechanistic level, the poor filtration behaviour (of great relevance to industrial hydrometallurgical processing) may be attributed to the following hypothesis. At lower pH, it is likely that there is greater disruption and dissolution of the insoluble calcine components, thus providing smaller templates for precipitation and aggregation, hence not exhibiting the structural stabilization of the precipitate that is observed at higher pH. This is significant if one considers the difference between the two types of ferrihydrite particles observed in Silica is well known to form gels in sulfate solutions. The supersaturation of SiO The exact association between silicon and ferrihydrite is under debate, but Si–O–Fe bonds are assumed to exist, particularly at or near the surface Thus, high silica solution concentrations in hydrometallurgy are likely to have an adverse effect on the ferrihydrite precipitation mechanism. In this case, nucleation is followed by very limited crystal growth and the secondary processes of agglomeration and aggregation dominate the ferrihydrite precipitation mechanism. Homogeneous nucleation is unlikely to occur completely homogeneously, due to the presence of the insoluble calcine components. However, it is unclear if these components act as heterogeneous nucleation sites or simply as aggregation sites for homogeneous nuclei. It is more likely that the two processes act in unison. The ferrihydrite precipitation mechanism is believed to obey the theories presented by Cornell and Schwertmann The porosity appears to be created by the aggregation of the primary and secondary particles. As no further growth or cementation processes are likely to occur, nucleation is the only possible mechanism to fill in pores created by aggregation. The scale of aggregation also creates porosity. That is, pore sizes may be created by the joining of two primary crystallites, of width two times the crystallite radius (3–7 It may be proposed that as the supersaturation (driving force), and hence the rate of nucleation and crystallization, increases, aggregation and agglomeration processes are likely to increase in randomness, forming less ordered precipitates. Thus, producing more open, irregular and porous particles. Obviously, as the randomness increases proportionally with supersaturation, at some point gelation may occur. This also highlights the importance of mixing. Superior mixing is required to avoid high supersaturation zones and to increase well-ordered aggregation, but should not be of sufficiently high shear as to disrupt aggregate formation, as observed by Lo and Waite The presence of the insoluble calcine components, appear to stabilize ferrihydrite aggregation, such that very large particles are formed, with less porosity and more ordered aggregates. This has a dramatic effect on significant hydrometallurgical properties, like filtration. The transformation of ferrihydrite to goethite appears to be somewhat inhibited by the presence of silica, but also by the fast kinetics of ferrihydrite precipitation in this instance (to be presented in a subsequent paper). The very mechanism of ferrihydrite precipitation raises several perplexing questions, which unfortunately, at this stage remain unanswered. Ferrihydrite like most iron oxy-hydroxides is known to form by hydrolysis and increasing polymerization of iron octahedra Effective precipitation of hydrometallurgical residues involving ferrihydrite is a complex and intricate task. The precipitation mechanism is dominated by the nucleation and aggregation of exceptionally small primary crystallites. This can potentially create particles of high surface area and porosity (open structured, non-compact), which exhibit poor hydrometallurgical processing characteristics. However, stringent control of pH, silica concentration and the rate of precipitation (via supersaturation and mixing) can help to produce a more compact residue of increased particle size distribution. The use of insoluble precipitation templates also appears to aid the precipitation and aggregation mechanisms, enhancing filtration properties. Unfortunately, there appears to be a limit to which the structure and properties of ferrihydrite can be manipulated by altering crystallization conditions, due to the fundamentally disordered nature of ferrihydrite. The use of on-line in situ analysis as in the case of FBRM has been demonstrated as a powerful tool when studying precipitation systems of this kind. The Australian Research Council (ARC), The Department of Employment, Education, Training and Youth Affairs and Pasminco Ltd are thanked for their financial support through the APA (I) research grant program. This research has also received support from the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) program through The AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy. The significant assistance provided by Dr Ross Gordon Cooper (Pasminco Ltd) is appreciated.