The erosion–corrosion wear characteristics and mechanism of martensitic ductile cast irons with different alloying compositions in quartz slurries with different pH values were determined and analysed. The results indicated that the erosion–corrosion wear resistance of martensitic ductile cast iron would be increased not only with the pH values of the slurry and the erosion angle, but also with the addition of copper, nickel and chromium elements, respectively. A few of eutectic carbides would appear in the microstructures of ductile cast iron when the chromium element is added into this cast iron. However, these carbides would harm the erosion–corrosion wear resistance of this cast iron in acidic slurry. The addition of Ni, Cu, Cr elements and increase of Si element content would be helpful to improve the erosion–corrosion wear resistance of this cast iron in neutral and alkaline slurry, especially for chromium. Because the hardness of ductile cast iron could be remarkably increased by the occurrence of carbides when the chromium element was added. The erosion–corrosion mechanisms of the martensitic ductile cast irons were dominated by particles erosion wear in alkaline and neutral slurries, and by the interaction of particle erosion wear and medium corrosion in acidic slurry.Ductile cast iron, which has excellent mechanical properties, has been widely used as a structural material in the machine, the automobile industry, the mining industry, and so on Ductile cast iron for testing was melted at the temperature of 1550 The erosion–corrosion test was carried out with a slurry wear tester as shown in The wear surface morphology was observed in the scanning electron microscope of Amary-1000B to study the mechanism of erosion–corrosion wear of ductile cast iron in erosion–corrosion wear tests. The corrosion potential of ductile casts was determined by potentiostat. The corrosion media were sulfuric acidic solution with pH 2 and 4, water with pH 7, and sodium hydroxide solution with pH 10 and 12, respectively. The erosion–corrosion wear resistances of ductile cast irons with different compositions under the conditions of different impact angles and pH value slurries are shown in  The pH value of slurry media would affect the erosion–corrosion wear resistance of ductile cast iron except the particles impact angle, as shown in The hardenability of ductile cast iron could be increased when the alloying elements were added into it, but the effects of different alloying elements added in ductile cast iron on its microstructures and hardness were different, as shown in Though the hardness of ductile cast iron in which was added the nickel element was lower than that of other elements, its erosion–corrosion wear resistance was better in the acidic medium. This was because of the fact that the nickel element increased the corrosion potential of metallic matrix of ductile cast iron except for increasing its hardenability, as shown in  The erosion–corrosion wear resistance of ductile cast iron would be increased with the increase of the pH values of the slurries and the impact angle of solid particles. The wear mechanism of the ductile cast iron was dominated by the combination of solid particles micro-cutting wear and medium corrosion in acidic slurry, and by solid particles micro-cutting wear in neutral and alkaline slurry, compared with a little corrosion. The erosion–corrosion wear resistance of ductile cast iron would be increased with the addition of Ni, Cu, elements, increase of the silicon content in acidic slurry, and by the addition of Cr, Ni, Cu elements in neutral and alkaline medium slurry, respectively.