The present paper deals with the effect of notch depth on J-integral and critical fracture load in a plate made of functionally graded aluminum–silicone carbide composite (Al–SiC) with U-notch under bending. The weight fraction of SiC particles varies from 0% to 20% through the specimen width. Using three criteria namely mean stress (MS), point stress (PS), and averaged strain-energy density (ASED), the critical fracture load has been predicted and its variation with respect to the notch depth has been studied. A comparison of the J-integral between functionally graded and homogeneous Al–SiC composite were made, where the notch tip in the functionally graded material is situated in a layer with same mechanical properties as the homogeneous composite. The results indicated that in the case where the notch scene is toward brittleness increment the critical J-integral in functionally graded material (FGM) is larger than that of in homogeneous material with the same mechanical properties at the notch tip. Therefore, FGM is more convenient than homogeneous material against fracture.notch depth thickness of the specimen critical distance in mean stress criterion Young’s modulus Young’s modulus of base point applied load critical fracture load  critical value of fracture toughness kilo Newton (unit of force) mega Pascal multiplied to millimetres (unit of millimetres (unit of dimensions) Newton (unit of force) control radius polar coordinate critical distance in point stress criterion span length in TPB specimens critical value of strain-energy density width of the specimen a curve surrounding the notch tip Poisson’s ratio angular coordinate notch radius maximum stress at the notch tip nominal stress referred to the net area ultimate tensile strength Analytical work on functionally graded materials goes back as early as the late 1960s when soil was modeled as a nonhomogeneous material by Gibson In contrast to the above-described growing body of analytical studies, there are some experimental and numerical investigations of fracture of functionally graded materials. Li et al. Although several numerical works have been carried out on the In this paper, the In the present paper, a specimen with a blunt U-notch under three-point bending (TPB) is considered ( In a Cartesian coordinate system with the The Cartesian coordinate origin is located on a certain distance Filippi et al. Under plane strain condition, Yosibash In homogeneous materials, Control volume is a domain ahead of notch where its boundary is an arc with Control volume outer boundary (bold arcs in Functionally graded aluminum–silicone carbide composite (FG Al–SiC) was produced by powder metallurgy. The width, thickness, length, and the notch root radius of the specimen were selected as 40, 15, 200, and 2 in mm, respectively. The effect of notch depth on To measure the fracture load, three-point bending (TPB) loading was used ( A number of cracking criteria applicable to homogeneous brittle or quasi-brittle materials have been proposed. The aims of these criteria are evaluating the critical fracture load of components weakened by sharp and blunt notches. In this section three criteria are studied for prediction of the critical fracture load in a plate with U-notch made of functionally graded material. According to the mean stress (MS) criterion The critical distance is considered to be equal to the distance used in Ref. According to the point stress (PS) criterion It should be noted that the According to this criterion The The control volume boundary (integration path) for two cases of notch depth – equal to 11 It may be a research interest to compare the The critical fracture load predicting by those three criteria expressed in Section 3.2 with respect to the notch depth are shown in The specimens were tested according to Section 3.1. A typical fractured sample is shown in It is interesting to evaluate the critical  Generally, control volume boundary in homogeneous materials is in the form of circular arc The variation of the The experimental results and theoretical predictions were shown in The critical The study of