Extensive particle fracture has been noticed in projectile penetration tests. However current models for predicting projectile penetration depths do not consider particle fracture. Therefore, in order to understand the role of particle shape on single grain strength and the subsequent comminution process, single grain crushing tests on sand grains of different shapes and sizes were performed. High-resolution, three dimensional images of grain surface, were created using confocal microscope and fracture of the grains were captured with high-speed imaging. Acoustic emissions during single grain crushing was used to estimate the energy released during grain fracture. It was found that local stress fields influence particle strength and in natural granular material surface flaws maybe the critical flaw causing fracture. The estimated critical flaw size causing fracture were submicron in size. The mass specific fracture energy increased with increasing failure stress and decreasing particle size and is significantly greater than that computed from pure diametrical breaking. Except for large angular grains, mass specific energies for different shapes were similar. Angular sands required multiple events to break. The outcome of this work can be utilized in geomechanics to understand the comminution process and in power industry to estimate the energy required for comminution.Laboratory projectile penetration tests have shown extensive comminution along the path of the projectile, and the formation of false tip composed of crushed grains at the tip of projectiles ( When the force on a particle exceeds its tensile strength, a grain fractures creating new surfaces and progenies of different sizes. Fracture in brittle material is understood to occur when the stress intensity factor at one of the flaws, either volume or surface, exceeds the critical value. The crack then propagates instantly and uninhibited until it emerges at a boundary. This may lead to the formation of either two or many progenies of smaller sizes and different shapes. Energy is dissipated in the creation of new surfaces, sound, and motion of the progenies. The knowledge of the ratio of energy dissipated in creating new surfaces to the overall energy required for comminution will help in the design of efficient systems for creating fines. Fracture of single particles are governed by stress field at the contacts ( It is generally agreed that the coordination number influences particle fracture ( Particle fracture energy has generally been computed with the assumption of elastic spherical grains. In this work, single particle crushing data on rounded and angular sands are presented. In order to better understand the cause of the variability of strength, in addition to angularity, thin sections were prepared to facilitate observation of defects in the grains. Thin sections can also reveal if a sand grain is single crystal or multi-crystalline. Further, high-resolution three-dimensional (3D) images of grain surfaces were created to gain further insights on the effect of local stress field and grain-platen contact, on single particle strength. High speed images of particle crushing were captured to observe fracture initiation and if possible, crack propagation during particle crushing. Energy released during crushing was measured using acoustic emission (AE) for different particle shapes and sizes. These observations have been synthesized to present a probable framework for comminution process and the observation of fractal nature of comminuted remains. Three different sands, Ottawa sand, Q-Rok and Euroquarz Siligran were used for single grain crushing tests. These sands have very similar mineralogy, more than 99.5% quartz, but very different particle morphology. Ottawa sand is unground silica with sub-rounded grains, Q-Rok is unground silica with angular grains, and Siligran grains are sub-angular in shape. The maximum grain size of Ottawa sand and Q-Rok was 850 μm, and 710 μm for Siligran. Particle shape and size play major roles in determining the fracture strength of single grains. The sands were first washed and then divided into three size fractions using US standard sieves; retained on #30 sieve (R30), passing #30 sieve and retained on #35 sieve (P30R35), and passing #35 and retained on #40 sieve (P35R40). Shape parameters for each fraction were computed from two dimensional (2D) images using computational geometry ( Most of the single grain diametrical compression tests were performed with Zwick Z2.5 hardness testing machine. The hardness measuring head was equipped with a 200 N loadcell, a 0.02 μm resolution depth measuring device, and a 3 mm diameter flat punch diamond indenter. The transducer that measured displacements was separate from the load cell frame enabling very precise and zero compliance displacement measurements. The base plate was 5 mm thick and made of Silicon Carbide (SiC). The boundary conditions in single grain crushing can have significant influence on the fracture force ( A separate testing system, Psylotech μ-TS was used for single grain crushing test with AE measurement. The system was equipped with 1.6 kN load cell and 9 mm linear variable displacement transformer (LVDT). A proprietary technology incorporated in the system enabled a floating window scale which could resolve displacements to sub-micron resolution and force to sub newton resolution. This floating window keeps moving as the limits of the window is reached enabling the record of both full-scale measurements and high-resolution windowed measurements throughout the duration of the test. This presents a unique opportunity to measure small variations in force due to surface features and at the same time the capability to fracture particles of reasonable size. The base plate and flat punch diamond indenter used in the Psylotech system were the same as those used with Zwick system. Mistras Group AEWIN was used to record and analyze AE signals. A general-purpose AE sensor, R15a, was attached to the loading head as shown in AE measures transient elastic waves that is generated in a medium when energy is suddenly released. In engineering material, generation of elastic waves generally coincides with the formation and propagation of cracks. AE can capture this dynamic phenomenon. The five parameters that are generally used to characterize AE signals are amplitude ( AE has diverse applications, spanning from the study of damage and damage propagation in brittle materials ( High resolution KEYENCE VK-X200 series 3D laser scanning confocal microscope was used for very fine resolution 3D images of few grains at 10X magnification. Confocal microscopes block out of focus-plane light using a spatial pinhole, allowing light only from the focal-plane. A 3D image of the object is then constructed from 2D images at various heights by moving the focal plane from the bottom to the top of the object. Single sand grains were placed on a dark surface and the start and end focus elevations were set below the base surface and above the top of the grain respectively. Three dimensional images for the three different sands displaying typical surface features of the sands are shown in High speed images enable visualizing the formation and propagation of cracks in engineering materials. High speed images of particle crushing were captured with Photron Fastcam APX RS high speed camera. A low magnification lens was attached to the camera and sand grains were illuminated using two focused light beams. Due to explosive nature of fracture, the frame rates for Ottawa sand and Siligran were 3000 frames per second (fps), whereas the frame rate for Q-Rok was 150 fps for longer imaging time to capture asperities breaking and the final breakage. Single grain crushing tests assumes that fracture occurs from tensile stresses ( High speed images captured during these tests further illustrate the role of particle shape and surface features on particle strength. Ottawa sand and Siligran generally exhibited diametrical fracture as seen in The results of single grain crushing are modelled using the two parameter Weibull distribution ( Size fractions based on sieve analysis results in a very non-uniform particle size. As the grains are bouncing in the mesh, particles with their smallest dimension smaller than the mesh size can pass through the openings. Particles were then chosen randomly based on visual estimation of equal size which may result in particles of varying height in the direction of loading. Therefore, the height of the particles, immediately before the application of the load was used to group the particles into three groups based on Weibull plots for the largest size clusters for the three sands are shown in The relationship between crushing strength and the size of the grains is shown in Surface flaws can significantly reduce the strength of grain; Assuming surface flaws, and linear scaling of flaw size with particle size ( The values of Example force history curves along with the AE energy releases are shown in The relationship between elastic strain energy at fracture and particle strength have been shown to be a power law relationship ( The mass specific energy required to crush particles increases with decreasing particle size as shown in If coordination number is the dominant phenomenon that controls comminution process, then the effect of smaller grains surrounding a larger grain is such that it offsets, in some cases, orders of magnitude of higher energy required to crush smaller particles than larger particles. This may not be possible until enough fines have been created. For example, if an 800 μm grain is surrounded by 300 μm grains, the energy required to crush the smaller grains is almost two orders of magnitude greater than that required to crush the larger grain. Therefore, initially the size dependence of strength maybe the dominant process with a shift to coordination number dominating the comminution as more fines are produced. A stage may then be reached at which for a given input energy no more crushing is possible. Therefore, for a starting particle size distribution and relative density it is possible to arrive at a unique particle size distribution ( The power law relationship between mass specific energy and particle size ( In this research work, results of single grain crushing tests have been presented along with some detailed imaging of grain surfaces, high speed imaging of fracture and measurement of acoustic emissions of grain fracture. Local stress fields at contacts play a major role in fracture strength of single grains. Some differences in fracture strength may be attributed to grain shape and features at contacts. For the size group presented, Weibull distribution is found to be acceptable for modeling size dependent strength of the grains. Weibull modulus is affected by particle shape and decreases with increasing angularity. The computed Weibull moduli are consistent with the assumption of critical surface flaws for all sands. With decreasing grain size, the flaw size is a greater proportion of the grain size in rounded and high Weibull modulus grains, the flaw size increases at a faster rate for angular sands with smaller Weibull modulus. Acoustic emissions reveal that angular sands release lower energy at break and may require greater number of events leading up to the failure. The energy released at fracture increases with fracture stress. Low strength angular particles may at times release larger energy due to multiple small asperities breaking leading up to the main fracture. The mass specific energy required to cause fracture increases with decreasing particle size. This coupled with stress reduction in grains with coordination number may explain the fractal distribution of comminuted remains. This research was funded in its entirety through