In this study, the utilization efficiency of two quicklimes and their respective slaked lime slurry (milk of lime) products were evaluated using the precipitation of magnesium sulfate as a model system. Magnesium was selected because of its abundant presence in hydrometallurgical processing solutions and mineral processing slurries, where it is often the main buffering and lime consuming element at pH levels above 9. Lime, also called quicklime, purity is often measured in terms of available CaO percentage, CaO(avail%), the active component. The purpose of this investigation was to evaluate the validity and suitability of this commonly used industrial metric for the target application reaction. Two samples with CaO(avail%) of 93 and 80% w/w were used, in dry quicklime and slaked formats, as magnesium precipitation reagents. Utilization efficiencies were compared and found to differ significantly, depending on the original quicklime reagent and format of their respective slaked lime products. Utilization efficiency was defined as the mass portion of the quicklime that participates in the target application and was calculated for both slaked lime and quicklime reagent formats to facilitate comparisons. The main conclusion was that the CaO(avail%) metric was a very poor predictor of reagent utilization efficiency of slaked lime. Although the CaO(avail%) of quicklime, provides the theoretical amount of potential active reagent, slaked lime Ca(OH)2 particle size was found to have a greater influence on utilization efficiency. Utilization efficiencies were found to range from 34 to 89% for slaked limes with median Ca(OH)2 particle sizes of 67 and 5μm respectively. Precipitate coating effects on larger Ca(OH)2 particles were observed, leading to the occlusion of unreacted Ca(OH)2 particles. This coating mechanism is proposed as a potential reason for reduced utilization efficiency of poor quality slaked lime with a significant portion of large Ca(OH)2 particles. The findings demonstrate the potential error of assessing industrial slaked lime performance, based on lime CaO(avail%) alone. It is argued that industrial selection and assessment of lime sources, should instead be assessed by determining utilization efficiency in laboratory approximation tests of the target reactions or, at least, by industrial evaluation of slaked lime particle size distribution.In this study, the utilization efficiency of two quicklimes and their respective slaked lime slurry products were evaluated using the precipitation of magnesium hydroxide from magnesium sulfate as a model system. Magnesium was chosen because of its abundant occurrence in hydrometallurgical process solutions, originating from its ubiquitous presence in gangue minerals ( Environmental discharge limits for dissolved metal ions, may also impact on the extent of magnesium precipitation required. Hydrometallurgical effluents, for example, often have a strict discharge limit for Mn ( The most commonly used alkaline agents at pH levels above 6 are: lime (CaO), sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and magnesium oxide (MgO) of which lime is the lowest cost and, therefore, most frequently used to precipitate various metals ions from solution. The use of lime also has the advantage of removing sulfates from solution in the form of gypsum precipitates ( The common use of lime as pH adjustment and precipitation reagent makes it an important operational cost factor where high neutralization or precipitation duties are required. Lime utilization efficiency, together with price, is a determining factor of total lime cost. The accurate estimation of lime utilization efficiency is, therefore, an important industrial decision-making metric. In this context, “ The objective of this study was, therefore, to determine whether the CaO(avail%) was a suitable indicator of utilization efficiency for the precipitation of magnesium from sulfate solution, because of its relevance in metallurgical processing solutions. To achieve this objective two quicklime samples and resulting slaked limes were thoroughly characterized and their respective utilization efficiency compared. Although slaked lime, in the form of Ca(OH) The two quicklime samples, respectively referred to as QL A and QL B, were comprehensively characterized and then slaked to produce three different slaked limes, hereafter referred to as milks of lime MoL A, MoL B1 and MoL B2, as summarized in Each quicklime sample was homogenized and split, using a RT 75 sample splitter from Retsch, prior to being stored in sealed containers at room temperature in order to avoid hydration and carbonation, before being used. Elemental composition of each quicklime sample was determined using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) with a PANalytical Magix Pro equipped with rhodium tube, and beryllium window of 75 Phase determination was conducted using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer (XRD) using K-α copper X-ray (maximum of 3 The extents of quicklime hydration and carbonation were determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using a Mettler Toledo TGA-DSC1 apparatus operated between 30 and 950 CaO(avail%) was measured using the sugar titration method described in European Norm EN 459-2 ( Specific surface area (SSA) was measured using the Brunauer-Emmet- Teller (BET) technique with a Flowsorb II 2300 apparatus from Micromeritics, by degassing a 1 Quicklime reactivities were evaluated using the “ Quicklime particle size distribution (PSD) was determined by sieving 600 Continuous slaking, to produce milk of lime from quicklime, was conducted in a 10 Milk of lime solid content was measured using a Precisa Moisture Analyser XM60, by heating the sample to 105 Milk of lime viscosity was measured with a Brookfield DVII – ULTRA Rheometer using an adapted spindle at 60 Milk of lime PSD was determined by diluting approximately 2 A 30 Elemental and phase characterization as well as extent of hydration and carbonation were determined for dried milks of lime samples using the same experimental methods and apparatus as for the quicklime (e.g. XRD, XRF, TGA) described earlier. Available calcium hydroxide was measured using the sugar titration method described in European Norm EN 459-2 ( SSA measurements were conducted on dried milk of lime samples in a similar manor as for quicklime samples and the results confirmed using Scanning Electronic Microscopy (SEM). Samples were gold coated using a Jeol JFCC-1100E ion sputter fine coat at 20 A magnesium sulfate solution was prepared by dissolving 507.1 Selected large particles of dried calcium hydroxide (prepared from natural lime, QL B) were humidified and agglomerated for 5 The two quicklimes (labelled QL A and QL B) had reasonably similar Ca elemental content ( Additional characterization results, provided in Quicklimes, as used in the study, were of a particle size smaller than 2 The two quicklimes were slaked using the CSTR method, generating milks of lime MoL A and MoL B1 respectively. In order to investigate Ca(OH) The XRD and TGA results indicated that all CaO was transformed into portlandite, Ca(OH) The differences in the two quicklimes (QL A and QL B, from Milk of lime reactivities (as measured with standard methods reported in The pseudo steady state tests provided an indication of the equilibrium conditions of consumption for the various lime-based reagents. A common feature of the results obtained is a pH increase with incremental addition of hydroxide ions ( The decrease in conductivity is proportional to the addition of calcium reagent, due to the decrease in concentration of Mg     A comparison of all reagent consumption scenarios, are shown in ( Significant differences in utilization efficiency were observed between the two slaked products. The utilization efficiency of MoL A was more than double that of B1, even when slaked under identical conditions. This difference was not adequately explained by the difference in CaO(avail%) (93% versus 80%) of their respective originating quicklimes. Instead it appears that particle size significantly influenced the utilization efficiency of slaked Ca(OH) The observed UE and corresponding d50 particle size, as well as specific area for all reagents, are shown in The observed UE data obtained offer significantly more relevant information than the CaO(avail%) of the quicklime, thereby illustrating the poor predictability of the CaO(avail%) metric. The superior performance of MoL A compared to MoL B1 was significantly disproportionate to the CaO(avail%) metric of their respective originating quicklimes (14% difference), but closer to that of MoL B2, which was a reduced particle size version of MoL B1. Fine particle size, with associated larger surface area of the milk of lime, was found to increase the utilization efficiency. Efficient lime reactivity and optimal slaking conditions are, therefore, important factors in producing milk of lime (slaked lime) with resulting high utilization efficiency when used in metallurgical processing applications. The sectional SEM (scanning electron microscopy) and EDX (energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy) view of Ca(OH) The key conclusion from this investigation was that the commonly used CaO(avail%) of lime (quicklime) was not a suitable indicator of utilization efficiency for the precipitation of magnesium sulfate. The significant differences in reagent utilization efficiency, not reflected by the CaO(avail%) metric, could have significant practical and commercial implications, if ignored. Slaked lime particle size and specific surface area were both found to have an empirical relationship with utilization efficiency, although based on the limited data set generated by this study. These parameters may provide valuable information if measured regularly at industrial scale to generate larger data-sets which can be correlated with actual plant performance utilization efficiencies of lime reagents. It is, however, suggested that direct determination of utilization efficiency at laboratory scale provides the most direct and accurate method to predict lime consumption performance when applied to conditions that approximate industrial conditions. Utilization efficiency, as defined in this study, encompasses all of the various factors that may influence the ultimate reagent consumption, including CaO(avail%) of the lime, slaking particle size, and particle coating effects. The influence of slaked lime Ca(OH) The authors thank Robert Gaertner for valuable inputs.