A basic principle of many processes for extracting copper and nickel from sulfide ores is to overlay the molten ore or matte with a lime–silica–iron oxide slag and blow with air or oxygen. Some of the iron present in the ore oxidizes and as a result, partitions to the slag phase, while some of the sulfur is carried off as sulfur dioxide. This chapter describes a series of calculations for application of computer-assisted thermochemistry, which model the phase equilibria and partition of elements between the matte, slag, alloy, and gas phases at various stages of the pyrometallurgical process. The results agree well with practical experience and also provide an insight into the detailed phase relationships to be expected during such processes. The subsequent processing depends on the composition of the ore, including the amounts of impurities, some of which might be of value. The chapter illustrates the calculation procedures.A basic principle of many processes for extracting copper and nickel from sulphide ores is to overlay the molten ore or matte with a lime–silica–iron oxide slag and blow with air or oxygen. Some of the iron present in the ore oxidises and, as a result, partitions to the slag phase, while some of the sulphur is carried off as sulphur dioxide. In this example of the application of computer-assisted thermochemistry a series of calculations is described which model the phase equilibria and partition of elements between the matte, slag, alloy and gas phases at various stages of the pyrometallurgical process. The results agree well with practical experience and also provide an insight into the detailed phase relationships to be expected during such processes. The subsequent processing depends very much on the composition of the ore, including the amounts of impurities, some of which may themselves be of value. The following discussion does not relate to any particular process and is intended only to illustrate the calculation procedures. Not all factors have been taken into account in the thermodynamic modelling. For example, the solution of Cu, Ni and S in the slag is not considered. Three types of process are considered, which have been more fully described by Dinsdale Partition of iron to the slag phase and sulphur to the gas phase while blowing the matte. The effect of sulphur content on phase separation in the liquid mattes especially those with low nickel content. Crystal transformation during solidification of a matte containing reduced amounts of sulphur and iron, which can be used to effect a further partition of the components. For these calculations, data are required for the matte, slag and gas phases. The plant operator needs to process ores of a range of compositions and to  In the second phase of the process the partial pressure of sulphur dioxide is considered to be maintained at 0.1 atm. Good agreement between calculated and experimental results has been demonstrated elsewhere [ There is a considerable tendency for mattes, particularly those of low nickel content, to unmix into sulphur-rich and sulphur-poor liquids. This is exploited in the Noranda process in which copper-rich mattes are blown down to a sulphur level at which a sulphur-poor liquid enriched in nickel separates. A feature of copper-rich nickel-poor mattes is that they tend to develop liquid–liquid immiscibility. Thus, at 1573 K, matte B exists as two liquids. As the amount of iron is reduced, the two liquids become miscible but immiscibility again develops as the amount of sulphur declines and a sulphur-poor phase separates. The proportions of the two phases and the distribution of components between them in this second regime are illustrated in It is instructive to examine the results of a single step in the calculations displayed graphically in Further separation of the components occurs during crystallisation of the matte on cooling. It may sometimes be advantageous not to reduce the iron to very low levels; among other things this avoids loss of values to the slag. Solidification sets in at 1050 K with the formation of the β and metallic fcc phases. Nickel is strongly segregated to the β phase, which approximates to Ni The calculations relate only to a single composition. Nevertheless they demonstrate that the crystallisation processes in a multiphase matte can be very complex and that calculations based on thermodynamic data can contribute greatly to the selection and optimisation of processing methods. The phases and thermodynamic models are given in The authors gratefully acknowledge the help of T. G. Chart for his advice and help in the critical assessment of data and R. H. Davies and J. A. Gisby