The interpretation of processes yielding aqueous contaminant removal in the presence of elemental iron (e.g. in Fe0/H2O systems) is subject to numerous complications. Reductive transformations by Fe0 and its primary corrosion products (FeII and H/H2) as well as adsorption onto and co-precipitation with secondary and tertiary iron corrosion products (iron hydroxides, oxyhydroxides, and mixed valence FeII/FeIII green rusts) are considered the main removal mechanisms on a case-to-case basis. Recent progress involving adsorption and co-precipitation as fundamental contaminant removal mechanisms have faced a certain scepticism. This work shows that results from electrocoagulation (EC), using iron as sacrificial electrode, support the adsorption/co-precipitation concept. It is reiterated that despite a century of commercial use of EC, the scientific understanding of the complex chemical and physical processes involved is still incomplete.Groundwater contamination is an environmental concern of worldwide relevance The PRB technology using metallic iron (Fe Despite two decades of extensive research, the mechanisms of contaminant removal in Fe A survey of the spectrum of efficiently removed species (oxidable, reducible and redox-insensitive) suggests that some removal mechanisms may be universal while others are specific. Universal mechanisms are necessarily those involved in the removal of redox-insensitive species: adsorption and co-precipitation. Therefore, as a rule, oxidable and reducible species may first be adsorbed and co-precipitated before redox transformations occur. Some species may be transformed in the aqueous phase (e.g. Cr The purpose of this work is to corroborate the universality of the adsorption/co-precipitation concept for the process of contaminant removal in Fe Aqueous iron corrosion is essentially an electrochemical process involving the anodic dissolution of iron and an appropriated cathodic reduction. For natural waters the two main cathodic reduction reactions are H The major feature from In natural waters, the electrochemical reactions are always accompanied by the formation of scales of mixed oxides including FeOOH, Fe The anodic iron dissolution after Eq. At pH The extent of iron dissolution from a Fe At a given pH value, whenever the solubility of an hydroxide (Fe(OH) Electrocoagulation (EC) is an electrochemical technology for the treatment of water and wastewater. A current with a potential ( When iron is used as electrode material, there are three major types of reactions in the electrochemical reactor (see oxidation reaction at the anode (iron dissolution): reduction reaction at the cathode: hydrolysis reaction: The equilibrium potential difference between the anode and the cathode is Eq. The EC process is based on the continuous in situ production of coagulants in the contaminated water. Coagulants result from anodic Fe EC has been demonstrated to be effective in the treatment of water and wastewater to remove metals such as Pb Electrocoagulation can be considered as an electrochemically ( The permeable reactive barrier (PRB) technology (the passive remediation Fe Thoughtful comments provided by Tanga L. Nadege (China University of Geosciences, Wuhan) and Charles P. Nanseu-Njiki (University of Yaoundé 1, Cameroon) on the draft manuscript are gratefully acknowledged. English corrections on the accepted draft manuscript by Christian Schardt (Institute of Mineralogy and Economic Geology, RWTH Aachen, Germany) are gratefully acknowledged. The manuscript was improved by the insightful comments of anonymous reviewers from Journal of Hazardous Materials.