The present study is focused on the leaching and recovery of phosphate and Rare Earth Elements (REEs) from the Esfordi phosphate concentrate (Yazd province, Iran), which contains 16.31% P, 37.13% Ca, 2.91% Fe, 3% F, 0.3% Cl, and the TREE content is 1.2%. Cerium, lanthanum and neodymium account for 82% of the total rare earth content. Fluorapatite, magnetite and calcite-dolomite, with 88.7%, 4.8% and 2.3%, respectively, are the predominant minerals in the concentrate. Monazite (1.2%), apatite and xenotime (0.2%) are the main REE-bearing minerals. A process was designed for the simultaneous recovery of phosphate and REEs form flourapatite concentrate. Through direct sulphuric acid baking of the concentrate, maximum Ce, La, Nd and Y recoveries of 85.5 ± 3.0%, 85.2 ± 2.4%, 83.8 ± 2.1% and 84.8 ± 2.0%, were achieved, respectively, at an acid to ore ratio of 2.9, temperature of 270 °C and digestion time of 110 min. The phosphate precipitation method was used as an effective method to separate iron and phosphate from rare earths. By increasing the 
                        
                           
                              Fe
                              
                                 3
                                 +
                              
                           
                           
                              P
                              
                                 O
                                 4
                                 
                                    3
                                    −
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                      ratio from 0.11 to 2 and gradually increasing the pH to 3.5, 98% of iron, 45% of Ca and all the Th precipitated out of solution. Subsequently, a total of 97% of rare earth elements were precipitated from solution by conventional bicarbonate precipitation to obtain a mixed concentrate containing 22.4% rare earth elements. The carbonate concentrate thus produced by using the mentioned novel process contained considerable amounts of calcium and sulfur. For this reason, a selective leaching stage is proposed to leach the calcium and phosphate from the concentrate prior to the acid baking process. This has been investigated in the part II of this research.Rare earth elements (REEs) comprise of seventeen chemical elements in the periodic table, specifically the fifteen lanthanides plus scandium and yttrium. REEs and the alloys that contain them are used in many devices such as computer memory storage, rechargeable batteries, cell phones, catalytic converters, magnets, fluorescent lighting and many more ( The REEs occur in over 160 discrete minerals. While most of these minerals are rare, the REEs content in them, expressed as oxide, can be as high as 60% rare earth oxide (REO). Among these minerals, bastnasite ((Ce,La)FCO The potential of phosphate rock as a source of rare earths has already been recognised in the 1960s ( In a previous study ( More than 99 % of the total rare earth values end up in the large quantities of phosphogypsum (CaSO Further, the Esfordi phosphate concentrate contains 14.0% P, 0.3% Cl and 3% F. Chloride and fluoride ions in the phosphoric acid produce mixtures of phosphoric and hydrochloric/hydrofluoric acids. Such mixtures are more reactive than the halide-free phosphoric acid, and they are consequently more corrosive. Therefore, severely corrosive conditions occur in the reaction tanks and in the evaporators ( Therefore, the Esfordi flotation concentrate is not a suitable feed for the common dihydrate phosphoric acid production process, and it is currently mixed with some phosphate concentrates from Morocco to dilute Cl and F to be acceptable as feed to the dihydrate phosphoric acid production process. In seeking an alternative, it stands to reason to investigate process options that allow the separation and simultaneous recovery of both phosphate and REEs. Concentrated sulfuric acid can typically decompose REE refractory minerals into soluble RE sulfates at elevated temperatures (acid baking or acid roasting) ( Furthermore, at higher temperatures, the following aspects leaching should be considered: The stable crystal form of calcium sulfate secondary phase is changed from CaSO A significant part of the fluorine in fluorapatite volatizes as HF and SiF The acid baking of fluorapatite, monazite, xenotime, calcite and iron oxide minerals can be expressed by following reactions (presentation of fluorapatite mineral composition as Ca As the Esfordi ore is of the magnetite-apatite type, iron interferes in the hydrometallurgical processing to separate dissolved REEs from the acid bake leach liquor. Like most REEs, the common valence of iron is +3. Further, it appears in the intermediate rare earth products and impacts at every step of the production process ( Given the above, the present study considered two potential process options for treating the Esfordi phosphate concentrate in order to recover both phosphate and REEs: Acid bake of the concentrate followed by selective removal of iron and phosphate to isolate an REE rich liquor (Part I). Acid leaching of the concentrate to dissolve apatite and then acid baking of the concentrated residue (Part II). The present paper is focused on optimising the parameters related to REE and phosphate leaching from the Esfordi concentrate. Further an effective method is developed to precipitate both phosphate and iron from the solution, leaving an REE-rich liquor for further separation following conventional routes. The Esfordi site is situated 35 km NE of Bafgh, Yazd province, in central Iran. A 250 kg sample (P80 = 54 μm) containing 1.2% REEs was obtained from the Esfordi flotation plant. The sample was riffled into 10 kg lots by using a Jones riffler. It was further homogenized and riffled to 1000 g lots and stored in plastic bags for further splitting by Retsch® PT100 automatic sample divider just prior to experiments. Sub-samples were used for the characterization and baking studies without any further size reduction. Optical mineralogy, using the polished and thin sections, semi-quantitative X-ray diffraction (SQXRD), X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF), inductively coupled plasma - optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES), scanning electron microscopy – wavelength dispersive spectrometry (SEM-WDX), electron microprobe analysis (EMPA) and quantitative evaluation of minerals by scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) techniques were applied for ore characterization. Result of the elemental analysis of the concentrate sample is shown in As can be seen in XRD analysis showed that fluorapatite, magnetite, montmorillonite, calcite, talc, quartz were present in the Esfordi concentrate. The results were validated between XRD and QEMSCAN techniques. Mineralogical composition of the concentrate was determined by QEMSCAN and EMPA analyses. Concentrate samples were mixed with graphite, mixed with resin and prepared into 30 mm diameter polished blocks, carbon coated for QEMSCAN analysis. The same blocks were used for QEMSCAN and EMPA. The QEMSCAN analysis was carried out using a FEI Field emission gun QEMSCAN 650F at the Chemical Engineering Department, University of Cape Town, which was equipped with two Bruker 6030 SDD detectors operated at 25 kV and 10 nA beam current. Quantitative analysis of the fluorapatite and monazite minerals were carried out using a Superprobe Jeol JXA8100 microprobe at the Geology Department, University of Cape Town, which was equipped with four wavelength-dispersive spectrometers operated at 25 kV and 20 nA beam current. Counting times were 10 s for peak and 5 s for background. Quantitative analysis of the concentrate as determined by QEMSCAN is given in the SEM-EDS analysis was conducted on the Esfordi phosphate concentrate in order to elucidate the distribution of REE within the sample. The results showed that light rare earths were present in the monazite and fluorapatite minerals with Y present in the xenotime mineral. EDS peaks of REEs were weak in the fluorapatite mineral. SEM-EDS analyses compared to EMPA-WDS of the minerals shows good agreement only for the major REEs in the mineral (>10 wt%) ( Results of the EMPA analysis showed that fluorapatite is the only mineral that contains F and Cl. Based on the chemical analysis of the concentrate ( Finally, the distribution of rare earths in fluorapatite, monazite and xenotime minerals calculated based on the combination of the QEMSCAN and EMPA analyses is presented in As can be seen in The monazite and xenotime particle sizes are mostly fine. Results of QEMSCAN analysis indicated that 80 wt% of the fluorapatite, monazite and xenotime is made up of particles that are <50 μm, 23 μm and 22 μm in diameter, respectively. The concentrate was rinsed with acetone to remove flotation chemicals before the baking experiments in a muffle furnace. In each test, 15 g of the concentrate was mixed with a specific amount of analytical grade sulfuric acid (Merck Millipore Company, 95–97%) at a sulfuric acid to concentrate ratio of 2–3 w/w. The ingredients were thoroughly mixed and transferred into a number of porcelain crucibles (2–3 g of the mixture in each crucible). The crucible was weighed and transferred to the preheated muffle furnace (190–270 °C) and baked for fixed times (1–3 h), before being removed, cooled and weighed. The produced paste (baked material) was then removed from the crucible, and if dry, the paste was ground using a mortar and pestle. The lower limit of the temperature range was decided to be 190 °C because rare earth minerals begin to decompose at temperatures higher than 160 °C ( For the acid bake experiments, 20 tests were designed using central composite design (CCD) method of experiment design (Response Surface Methodology of DX7 software) with baking time, acid to solid ratio and baking temperature as the design variables. Water leaching experiments were conducted on the baked material, performed inside a stirred 0.5 l vessel at 500 rpm stirring speed for a period of 1 h. Increasing the stirring speed and water leaching time did not have any significant effect on the leaching efficiency of phosphate and REE. A certain amount of baked concentrate was added to the cold deionized water. After the completion of the leaching experiment (at solid to liquid ratios of 1:10 and 1:5) the suspension was filtered and solid residues were rinsed with an acidic solution pH = 1 (to match the pH established during leaching) and dried in an oven at 70 °C for a period of 12 h. The filtrate was subjected to pH and Eh measurements. The redox potential was measured using Metrohm 827 Lab with an Ag/AgCl electrode as reference electrode. The pregnant leach solutions were combined for assaying. All the solid and liquid samples were analyzed to provide data to calculate mass balance and leaching efficiency. The amount of gases released during baking was calculated based on the mass balance. The conditions of the acid baking-water leaching tests are shown in The effect of mixing in the acid bake experiments was tested using a 1-l acid resistant stainless steel reactor with a custom-designed kneader. The baking temperature in the reactor was supplied by heating in a silicon oil bath. A certain amount of phosphate concentrate was added to pure sulfuric acid under constant agitation when the temperature reached the pre-set value (190–270 °C). After the completion of the baking experiment, the produced paste was removed from the reactor and prepared for water leaching experiments. By using a standard statistical software (DX7 or Matlab), enough information could be generated to fit a polynomial model to the data. In this study, the data was fitted with quadratic models and the model curves were then analyzed to find conditions for maximum leaching efficiency of REEs. Analysis of variance was used to calculate the statistical parameters. Statistical significance of all terms in the quadratic models was estimated by using F-test within 95% confidence interval. In the ANOVA table (not shown here), terms with P-values < 0.05 were selected as significant model terms. The ferric phosphate precipitation method according to The pH of the post-neutralization solution was increased from about 3.6 to about 6 using ammonium hydroxide containing 25% NH Low-temperature (below 300 °C) sulfuric acid baking of the concentrate followed by water-leaching was evaluated. A total of twenty acid baking experiments were designed using central composite design methodology ( The effect of baking temperature was studied in the range 190–270 °C at different baking times and acid to ore ratios. As stated in the introduction, the temperatures were selected to match typical acid baking condition in industry. The conditions and results of the acid baking tests are shown in As can be seen, the phosphate leaching efficiency in all the experiments was in the range of 95.7–97%. The results of run 19 show that in the sulfuric acid baking experiments, the ratio of acid to concentrate was the only important factor that influenced phosphate leaching efficiency. Quadratic polynomial models were fitted to the experimental data. These models are given below for the leaching efficiencies of Ce [Eq.  During the conventional leaching of fluorapatite with sulfuric acid, one of either gypsum (CaSO Although, according to Equilibrium composition of sulfuric acid as a function of temperature by using the equilibrium module of the HSC Chemistry© 7.1 is shown in As it can be seen from The stoichiometric requirement of sulfuric acid was calculated to be about 1 g pure H The extraction of Ce, La, Nd and Y at different baking times is shown in Water leaching experiments were conducted on the baked material (produced paste). In the different conditions of baking-water leaching experiments, the pH and the Eh of the leach solutions were measured to be 0.5 to 1.2 and 670 mV to 763 mV, respectively. As the baking time increased from 2 h to 3 h in the baking stage, the pH of water leaching solution increased slightly. This could be the result of greater acid consumption or loss at longer baking times. The Eh increased from 661 mV to 693 mV as the baking time increased from 1 h to 2 h. This behavior can be explained based on the increase in the Fe The mutual effect of the temperature and baking time on the extraction of Ce (taken as the indicator of other rare earths since all show more or less identical behaviour) was evaluated. They have a negative common effect on the REE extraction because both of them increase the consumption of sulfuric acid thereby increasing the pH of the water leaching solution and influencing precipitation of the rare earths. Following acid baking, the resultant rare earth sulfates residues were dissolved in water ( It should be noted that in an actual process, the paste (backed concentrate) from rotary kilns is cooled down in the open air for a certain period of time and then is leached with cold water ( As can be seen in The result obtained herein was compared to previous research focusing on REE backing-water leaching from high grade mineral concentrates (bastnaesite, monazite and xenotime), where an optimum water to concentrate ratio of 4:1–10:1 was reported ( No significant increase in REE leaching efficiency was observed at a water to concentrate ratio of 12:1, with an increase in pH recorded. This pH increase indicates the onset of re-precipitation of rare earths phosphates, and it would therefore be detrimental to operate the system at such high ratios. Re-washing of the residue with a solution of sulfuric acid with pH of 0.5 for 30 min showed that the water leaching should be carried out in 2 stages. By re-washing of the residue, the leaching efficiency of Ce, La, Nd and Y increased from 73.5 to 82%, 70.9 to 80.1%, 73.8 to 80.9% and 66.2 to 73.6%, respectively. Further results (not shown) indicated that using an oxidant, increasing acidity and increasing wash time had no significant effect on the leaching efficiency of rare earths during the 2nd stage. The main objective of model fitting was to find the optimum conditions at which the highest rare earth and phosphate extractions could be achieved. A confirmatory test was run at these optimum conditions. The predicted and actual results are shown in Under the optimum conditions, the pH and the Eh of sulfate-phosphate PLS were 0.49 and 732 mV (vs. SHE). Although in these conditions the highest rare earth and phosphate extraction could be achieved, at the same time a lot of the acid is evaporated at 270 °C and the acid consumption is high, which is likely to adversely affect the economic viability of such conditions in practice. As this paper concerns academic research, the following experiments to purify the solution were carried out with leachate obtained from baking at optimum conditions. The composition of the produced PLS is shown in The most common methods to recover REE is by precipitation as REE oxalate ( According to As the precipitation of REEs as phosphates poses a significant problem for further recovery of the REEs, the phosphate should be precipitated in advance, prior to removal of the iron. Chemical precipitation of phosphate is a frequently utilized method of phosphate removal from wastewaters. This method has been patented by The starting solution contains 9960 mg/L P and 1920 mg/L iron that equals to a molar ratio of 0.11 for Fe At 0.11 M ratio of Fe As depicted in The FePO After the precipitation of iron and phosphate from the PLS, the pH of the post-neutralized solution was increased further and the rare earths were precipitated in the form of rare earth bicarbonates. The effect of bicarbonate to rare earths molar ratio ( According to The composition of rare earth carbonate precipitate is shown in The composition of carbonate concentrate shows that a considerable amount of calcium sulfate remains in the final precipitate. As mentioned earlier, part of the lanthanides are present in isomorphous substitution with Ca Drawing together the various process steps discussed here, an integrated flowsheet has been compiled, which is presented in  Characterization of the Esfordi concentrate indicated that fluorapatite, magnetite and calcite-dolomite are predominant minerals in the concentrate and monazite and xenotime are the main REE minerals of the concentrate. It is important from the processing point of view that 62–64% of the Ce, 61–70% of the La and 48–59 of the Nd was associated with monazite mineral. The majority of Y (86–98%) was associated with xenotime mineral. In the direct baking of the concentrate, maximum Ce, La, Nd and Y recoveries reached 85.5 ± 2.9%, 85.2 ± 2.4%, 83.8 ± 2.1% and 84.8 ± 2%, respectively, by using a sulfuric acid to ore ratio of 2.9, temperature of 270 °C, baking time of 110 min and water to concentrate ratio of 15 (over 2 stages). The results of thermodynamic modeling of baking at elevated temperatures and phase characterization analysis showed that anhydrite was the stable form of calcium sulfate, which did not recrystallize to gypsum after 1 h leaching in water. During the precipitation of iron and phosphate from PLS, as the pH increased to 3.5, 97.7% of iron, 44.7% of Ca and all the Th precipitated out of solution. In the bicarbonate precipitation of rare earths, the optimum bicarbonate precipitation conditions were determined to be bicarbonate to rare earth elements molar ratio of 4, precipitation time of 90 min and 40 °C. Under these conditions, 96.8% of total rare earth elements precipitated from solution and a mixed concentrate with 22.4% rare earth elements was obtained. The produced carbonate concentrate contains considerable amounts of calcium and sulfur in the form of gypsum, which may present problems with further processing of this material to recover the REEs. Some of potential concerns with the proposed process are environmental and techno-economic feasibility considerations that need further investigation. In addition, to avoid the requirement of a further gypsum treatment step, a selective leaching stage could be employed to leach the calcium and phosphate from the concentrate prior to the acid baking process. In this way, part of rare earths that are present in the fluorapatite itself (as opposed to the monazite and xenotime phases) would be dissolved in such a pre-leach and would be recovered from there, whereas the remaining monazite and xenotime phases could be treated in a conventional acid bake process. This route is investigated further in the context of the Esfordi concentrate in part II. The authors would like to thank the This work is based on the research supported in part by the The authors wish to acknowledge the contribution by Gaynor Yorath and Olga Masakona, Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Cape Town, for their help with the QEMSCAN.