The effect of the addition of silver chloride on the bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate, which contained pyrite, sphalerite and galena as sulfide gangue minerals, has been investigated using Thiobacillus ferrooxidans. The addition of silver chloride accelerated the dissolution of copper from the chalcopyrite concentrate. The dissolution rate of Cu was more higher with silver chloride than with the addition of silver sulfate solution at the initial stage of the bioleaching experiments. The recovery of copper increased with increase in the amount of silver chloride. The enhanced dissolution of chalcopyrite did not occur without the contact between silver chloride and chalcopyrite.The catalytic effect of silver ion in the leaching of chalcopyrite by ferric sulfate ( The solubility of silver chloride in the water is very low, and its solubility product of silver chloride is 1.78×10 Chalcopyrite concentrate used in this study was obtained from Hanaoka mine in Japan. X-ray diffraction analysis showed the patterns of pyrite, sphalerite and galena besides the pattern of chalcopyrite. The chemical analysis of chalcopyrite concentrate is as follows; Cu: 20.39%; Fe: 30.22%; Zn: 4.98%; Pb: 4.46%. A strain of Leaching tests were carried out in 250 ml Elenmeryer flasks at the pulp density of 2%(4 g sample/200 ml 9 K medium without ferrous iron). When silver chloride was added, it was mixed with chalcopyrite concentrate. Incubation was performed at 25°C in a reciprocary shaker. In all leaching tests, sample solutions were withdrawn from time to time for analysis and an equal volume of the medium was replaced. Any evaporation was compensated for with the medium. Copper and silver were analyzed through atomic absorption spectrometer (Hitachi 170-10). Total iron and ferrous iron were determined colorimetrically by a modification of  To investigate the effect of the contact between silver chloride particle and chalcopyrite concentrate on the bioleaching, a bioleaching experiment was carried out without the contact between them. Two hundred sixty-six milligrams of silver chloride was placed in a 10-ml beaker. The beaker was placed in a 300-ml Erlenmeyer flask with inoculated 200 ml 9 K medium and 4 g of chalcopyrite concentrate. The results were shown in Two bioleaching tests were carried out with 266 mg silver chloride addition, and each bioleach residue was collected after 20 days of bioleaching by filtration. One bioleach residue was dried. The other bioleach residue was added in 50 ml of 1 N HCl and agitated by a magnetic stirrer for 10 min. Then it was filtered and dried. New bioleaching tests were carried out by adding the residues instead of silver chloride. The results were shown in The effect of the kind of silver compound on the bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate has been investigated by adding silver sulfate solution or silver chloride particles. The amount of them added was 200 mg as a silver in the both case. The results are shown in To investigate the solubility of silver chloride, 266 mg of silver chloride was added in 200 ml of H   (1) The addition of silver chloride accelerated copper dissolution in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite concentrate using (2) The addition of silver chloride did not inhibit the ferrous iron oxidation ability of