In the UG2 ore (Bushveld Complex, South Africa) flotation, normally more than 3% of the gangue minerals, principally chromite with talc and pyroxene, report to the concentrate diluting the PGM recovery and contributing to subsequent processing costs. Previous studies have identified residual talc-like layers on orthopyroxene surfaces in Merensky ore flotation contributing to inadvertent flotation of relatively large particles (20–150µm) of this mineral. Chromite (75–150µm) from flotation of UG2 ore has been similarly examined. Statistical comparison of ToF-SIMS analysis of particles from concentrate and tails reveals no significant difference in Cu, Pb, Ni and collector (IBX and DTP) signals between these streams but surface exposure of Mg and Si is favoured in the concentrate. The flotation rate of coarse chromite correlates with the exposures of magnesium and silicon in patches on the chromite surface; higher exposures give earlier flotation. Conversely, there is a negative correlation with signals corresponding to the chromite surface, i.e. Cr, Fe, Al. Flotation of chromite without collector has confirmed this statistical discrimination. Hydrophobic talc-like residual layers, similar to those found on orthopyroxene surfaces, probably from partial alteration, explain this flotation mechanism.The Merensky and UG2 reefs in the Bushveld Complex in South Africa, containing platinum group elements (PGE) and some base metal sulfides, are major sources of platinum for world supply ( A problem of considerable significance is the recovery of chromite to the UG2 concentrate. In UG2 flotation, normally more than 3% of the gangue minerals, principally chromite with talc and pyroxene, report to the concentrate diluting the PGE recovery but, more significantly, contributing to subsequent processing costs. Chromite is an oxide spinel mineral and forms species in smelting that are stable up to 2000 For comparison, in Merensky flotation operations, the orthopyroxene minerals are expected to accumulate in the tailing since they should not respond to isobutylxanthate(IBX)/dithiophosphate (DTP) flotation. The orthopyroxene in Merensky ore can also develop floatable properties by reaction with the flotation system, principally through inadvertent copper–collector complexation ( We have recently confirmed ( We have now examined the flotation of large particle chromite gangue in recovery of sulfides and PGE minerals in UG2 processing. The aim of this paper is not to assess the extent of recovery of larger chromite particles, which varies widely between UG2 ores, but to explain the mechanism by which this can occur. This paper will show that residual surface layers of talc-like composition on chromite surfaces after comminution can also cause true flotation of large (20–150 UG2 ore (OD 1390) supplied by Anglo Platinum was used for the batch flotation tests. The head assay for the unsized ore was determined as: 27.33% Cr 2 The samples have been generated following the standard flotation procedure and synthetic process water (natural pH 8.9) described in our previous paper ( For the collectorless flotation, a grind size of d The objective of the present work was to identify species that were surface active and likely to affect the flotation response of coarse chromite during processing of UG2. ToF-SIMS has been employed to provide identification and quantification of surface species responsible for differences in flotation behaviour of chromite. Consequently, the present study has focused on the coarse (+ The SEM analysis was carried out using a CamScan CS44FE field emission Secondary Electron Microscope (SEM) fitted with a CamScan Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectrometer (EDXS). Prior to analysis the insulating mineral samples were coated with conductive carbon films to a thickness of 20–30 XRD was used to examine the changing content of chromite and talc-like phases across feed, successive concentrates and tails. XRD patterns were recorded with a Philips PW1050/25 goniometer using Co Kα radiation in step (0.02°; speed 0.5°/min) mode from 7–70° scans. Prior to the XRD measurements, the samples were thoroughly ground. Samples for ToF-SIMS were collected directly from the concentrates and tail pulps, the solutions degassed with nitrogen gas to remove dissolved oxygen, capped and frozen to halt surface reactions according to the well-established method used in this and many other projects ( The ToF-SIMS analyses were performed with a PHI TRIFT II (model 2100) spectrometer (PHI Electronics Ltd, USA) equipped with The aim of the study was to compare the surface chemical characteristics of coarse chromite recovered into the successive concentrates and into the tail. The differences in the surface species on chromite identified by ToF-SIMS were correlated with the XRD data in order to define the phase(s) present at the chromite surface that influence the mineral floatability. The work required identifying and quantifying surface species including positive ions of Mg, Si, Cr, Fe, Cu, Pb, Ni, and Ca and negative ions of O, OH, S and collector sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) and diisobutyldithiophosphinate (SK5 or DTP) molecular ions and fragments on individual grains. Because of the inherent surface inhomogeneity the results can differ significantly between particles. For direct comparison of signals from different samples, intensities were normalised to the total ion yield from the same area to minimise differences due to topography and matrix effects. Adopting statistical methods (the analysis of means) has diminished the risk of incorrect conclusions and given specific confidence intervals to the findings. The error bars in the relevant figure captions, arising from the standard statistical analysis of means described in The mass recovery during the single stage prefloat tests using frother only, i.e. no collector or depressant addition performed on UG2 (d Mineralogical examination of the naturally hydrophobic minerals recovered to concentrates, showed that talc was the dominant mineral followed by pyroxene and chromite. About 3% of the chromite was recovered predominantly in the 25–50 To establish whether any of this differentiation is associated with different bulk mineral compositions of the chromite grains, SEM/EDXS was used to examine whole particles of chromite in successive concentrates and tail. The results of the statistical analysis are shown in SEM/EDXS can, however, identify patches of altered silicates on some large chromite particle surfaces in concentrates as illustrated in The final recovery from the collectorless single stage prefloat and 3 stage cleaning is low (< For comparison with the SEM/EDXS results, the more surface-sensitive statistical ToF-SIMS studies of the collectorless prefloats were undertaken. The basis of the statistical analysis, and comparison of surface species between concentrate and tail, was set out in our earlier papers by  In marked contrast, the statistical analysis of the surface composition of whole particles ( As in the previous paper, the XRD patterns recorded from the successive concentrates and tail samples for both the − The standard flotation procedure described in The ToF-SIMS statistical analysis of the coarse (75–150 More detailed analysis of some of the other signals from species that may have contributed to the coarse chromite flotation is shown in The spectra demonstrate that the exposure of magnesium and silicon on chromite is stream dependent. The lines corresponding to chromium and iron do not dominate the positive mass spectrum, even in the tail sample, despite that they are the structural components of chromite. The extent of the chromite surface modification can be expressed in a variety of ways including the following intensity ratios: (Mg/Cr); (Mg/Fe); (Si/Cr); (Si/Fe) and (MgSi/CrFe). In view of the altered silicate model, where magnesium in the talc lattice can be substituted for iron or nickel, we have found the Si/Cr ratio to be the most useful for estimation of the surface modification of chromite with “talc-like species” correlating with the mineral flotation rate. The higher the Si/Cr ratio the higher the mineral floatability as illustrated in To verify that this statistical analysis is reflected in the surfaces of the chromite particles, we have examined coarse particles from concentrates and tails. The thickness of some of these patches, where weak Cr and Fe signals can also be detected, is probably less than 20 An example of a coarse chromite particle rejected to tails is shown in The aim of the study was to compare the surface chemical characteristics of coarse chromite recovered into the UG2 flotation concentrate with that rejected to the tails. These characteristics have been studied in both SEM/EDXS and statistical ToF-SIMS analysis of UG2 flotation without collector addition and in standard flotation with collector and depressant additions. These tests showed that more than 3% of the chromite is recovered, together with talc and orthopyroxene, in single stage floats. SEM and ToF-SIMS images of the first concentrate show mostly relatively large particles (+ The flotation rate of coarse chromite correlates with the exposures of magnesium and silicon; higher exposures give earlier flotation. Conversely, there is a negative correlation with signals corresponding to the chromite surface, i.e. Cr, Fe, Al. The imaged surfaces of coarse chromite reporting to concentrates show magnesium and silicon-rich patches of high intensity. The results consistently indicate hydrophobic character of these patches (i.e. altered magnesium silicate species). There is no statistical evidence of other hydrophobic species on these concentrate particles, e.g. metal (Cu, Ni, Pb)-collector complexes, discriminating between concentrates and tails in flotation separation. In contrast to chromite reporting to flotation concentrates, the rejected chromite particles rarely show evidence of hydrophobic talc-like patches. There is a relatively even distribution of adsorbed magnesium and Si species (probably) silicate ions contributing to the hydrophilic characteristics of these surfaces. The silicon to chromium intensity ratio in ToF-SIMS appears to be a reliable expression of the chromite surface coverage with altered silicates Hence, although both the orthopyroxene in Merensky ore and the chromite in UG2 ore can develop floatable properties by reaction with the flotation system, other geochemical processes can potentially produce naturally floatable coarse gangue. In practice, depressants, normally natural (e.g. guar gum) or synthetic (e.g. CMC, carboxymethylcellulose) polysaccharides, are added to flotation circuits to reduce gangue flotation but, under certain conditions, this has been shown to also reduce sulfide mineral recovery, particularly guar reducing the recovery of PGE-bearing pyrrhotite ( We gratefully acknowledge Anglo Platinum P/L (Sandy Lambert, Neville Plint) for project support and permission to publish; Andrew Michelmore (IWRI) for flotation tests and XRD of products; Len Green (IWRI) for SEM/EDXS studies; Sandy Lambert, Deryck de Vaux, Vrat Malysiak, Natalie Shackleton and Robert Schouwstra (Anglo Research) for extensive discussions of the results and editing of the paper; Dee Bradshaw (JKMRC) and Megan Becker (UCT) for advice and discussion on their SEM work on similar surface layers.