We studied the coalescence of air bubbles in pure water and aqueous solutions of inorganic electrolytes and frothers by measuring the lifetimes of thin free aqueous films formed at a broad range of interface approach velocities with using a microfabricated film holder. For pure water, at ultra-low approach velocities the formed films were highly unstable, and the film lifetimes increased with increasing the approach speed, reaching a peak before decreasing at higher approach speeds. Similar trend was observed for the lifetimes of the films containing inorganic electrolytes and frothers of different types and concentrations. The results suggested that interface approach velocity might be an important factor affecting bubble coalescence in flotation.Control of froth stability plays an important role in determining the product grade, throughput and recovery achieved from a flotation operation ( Bubble bursting has been recognized as an important indicator for froth stability and flotation performance. Recent work shows that froth stability in a single flotation cell can be represented by air recovery, the fraction of air entering a flotation cell that overflows the weir in unburst bubbles ( Bubble coalescence in a bubble column has been the subject of numerous studies. More recently, In the present work, we studied bubble coalescence in pure water and aqueous solutions of inorganic electrolytes and frothers by measuring the lifetimes of thin free liquid films formed at various interface approach speeds. The films were formed by using a microfabricated film holder, which simulates the bursting and coalescence of air bubbles whose diameters were less than 1 MIBC (99%, Acros Organics, USA) was used as received. The polypropylene glycol with an average molecular weight of 400 (PPG400) was obtained from Fluka. Sodium chloride (99.5%, Sigma Aldrich) was purified by roasting at 700 The thin film pressure balance technique ( We measured the stability of thin free films by approaching the two air/water interfaces at different speeds. The approach speed was controlled by using two methods. One was to suck water out of the film holder with using a gas-tight motorized nano-pump (WPI Inc.) whose suction rate can be controlled at the range of 10–9999 A digital video camera was used to record the images of the films at a rate of 30 frames per second. The intensity profile across the film surface was obtained off-line by using image processing software (Vision Assistant 8.6, National Instruments, USA). The thickness of pure water films was determined by using the microinterferometric technique ( The lifetimes of thin free films of pure water formed using the bike-wheel film holder were measured at various approach speeds and the results are presented in  In the present work, we applied different techniques to control the interface approach velocity, but the film lifetimes followed the same bell-shaped trend. It is, therefore, less likely that the trend is due to the artefacts associated with the nano-pump or the syringe-micropositioner system, if any. Our experimental system is capable of reaching uniform liquid drainage and ultra-low approach speeds of air/water interfaces, enabling us to move one step closer to the quasistatic condition where hydrodynamic effects are minimal. It is evident that at ultra-low approach speeds of air/water interfaces, free films of pure water are highly unstable with lifetime being less than 1 The observed trend in Zone II of   Also shown in It appears, therefore, that bubble coalescence is determined by film thinning rate and growth of surface fluctuations. Film drainage becomes slower with larger film radii ( Bubble coalescence inhibitors (or frothers) are widely used in froth flotation. These reagents mainly include short chain alcohols and polyoxypropylene alkyl ethers. In addition, salt water (or seawater) has also been used as frothing agent (  With adding 1 At 1  Likewise, The PPG400 films (see The results presented hitherto imply that the interface approach velocity is important in affecting the stability of foams and froths in flotation. It has been reported that air flow rate in a single flotation cell and air rate profiling down the flotation bank can be controlled to optimize froth stability and mobility and thus flotation performance ( Significant bubble coalescence occurs only at the vicinity of gas distributor or bubble generator ( We observed a bell-shaped trend of film lifetimes versus interface approach velocity. This trend is different from the monotonically increasing trend reported by Thin free films of pure water were formed using a microfabricated bike-wheel film holder and the approach speed of the air–water interfaces was controlled either by using a nano-pump to suck liquid out or by changing the vapor pressure in the chamber to compress the film. At ultra-low approach speeds, the pure water films were highly unstable with lifetimes being less than 1 Financial support for this study, provided by a Discovery Grant from the Australian Research Council, is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Prof. Anh V. Nguyen for giving permission to use the motorized nano-pump, Ms. Huijuan Li for experimental assistance, and Dr. L.G. Cascão Pereira for providing the bike-wheel microcell.