Most of the rare metals, described in this chapter, are used as key metals in numerous technical applications and were classified as “critical raw materials for the EU” by the European Commission in 2010: precious metals, rare earth metals, electronic metals, refractory metals and others like lithium and antimony. For these rare metals, main end-use-markets and a selection of developed and especially commercial practiced recycling routes are described. It is shown that conventional recycling processes for rare metals are often based on the process routes of mass metals (e.g. Cu, Pb, Zn, Al) and that geogenic (primary winning) and anthropogenic (secondary recycling) process chains widely overlap. Against the background of a resource-efficient process design, recycling routes for secondary raw materials like catalysts, permanent magnet scrap, battery scrap, phosphors scrap, and steelwork slags are discussed.Pressure leaching with NaAlO Pressure leaching with NaOH/Na Conventional recycling processes for rare metals are often based on the process routes of mass metals (e.g. Cu, Pb, Zn, Al). Because of low metal contents and production volumes of rare metals, it is not always economical to operate a specific recycling process. In these cases pretreatment or material conditioning steps are used to produce anthropogenic (recycling) concentrates, which are introduced in conventional extraction processes. Such concentrates do not necessarily have very high concentration levels of rare metals, but should be minimized in specific impurities, which are known for disturbing the ongoing process units. In this context it should be noted that geogenic (primary winning) and anthropogenic (secondary recycling) process chains widely overlap; i.e. they are not always clearly separated from each other. This is shown for indium and tellurium, for example ( Usually (pretreated) anthropogenic concentrates, recycling raw materials or intermediate products are introduced in pyro- or hydrometallurgical metal winning process routes, to increase their trace element amounts (parts per million ranges of In, Te) up to ranges of a few percent. Byproduct processes, i.e. extraction steps for indium and tellurium, need higher adequate metal contents (>0.1% In, >1% Te). Corresponding materials are, for example, anode slime (copper winning), lead/copper dross (lead winning) or leach residue (zinc winning) as well as slightly contaminated preconsumer photovoltaic scraps (wafer scrap, sputter targets). For end-of-life (EOL) scrap, i.e. complex composite materials with high impurity concentrations as present in printed circuit boards, purely hydrometallurgical processes are difficult to realize, liable to technical limitations and therefore not recommended ( Most of the rare metals, described in this chapter, are used as key metals in numerous technical applications and were classified as “critical raw materials for the EU” by the European Commission in 2010 (see The group of eight precious metals (PMs) can be basically distinguished as silver (Ag), gold (Au) and platinum group metals (PGMs). The PGMs comprise six transition metals, three light PGMs (atomic numbers 44–46): ruthenium (Ru), rhodium (Rh) and palladium (Pd) and three heavy PGMs (atomic numbers 76–78): osmium (Os), iridium (Ir) and platinum (Pt). All these metals are of high economic value and have similar chemical and physical properties, such as high melting point, low vapor pressure, high temperature coefficient of electrical resistivity and low coefficient of thermal expansion. Moreover, all PGMs have strong catalytic activity. Main end-use markets for PMs are as follows (      Global mine production of PMs was estimated for 2012 ( PM winning and recycling processes are common ( The individual process steps and technologies used in practice are designed for possible Pretreatment and preconcentration of the feedstock, sampling and assay. Concentration, extraction and separation of PMs by pyro- and hydrometallurgical techniques (melting, volatilization, chemical dissolution, precipitation, liquid–liquid extraction, distillation of tetraoxides, ion exchange, electrolytic processes, etc.). Refining (purification, pyrolysis, reduction, etc.) to PM-rich residues or pure metals. Important recycling sources for Rh are used automotive catalysts and catalysts from the chemical industry. In the case of Ru, recycling of preconsumer scrap plays an important role. This results from the fabrication of Ru sputter targets, which are used in the electronic industry mainly for manufacturing of hard disk drives; usually only 10% of the Ru ends up on the substrate. The biggest portion of Ir-containing recycling materials originates from electrochemical applications ( Complex EOL scraps like waste of electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) are commercially integrated in adapted conventional smelter–refinery processes. Mainly copper and lead cycles are used to collect PMs: Integrated “primary smelters” like Boliden, Rönnskär (Sweden) or Aurubis, Hamburg (Germany) are focusing on copper concentrates, but the upgrading of the flowsheet and the off-gas treatment enables them to recover PMs as byproducts. “Secondary smelters” like Umicore, Hoboken (Belgium) were focused on the recovery of PMs and special metals from scraps, using copper, lead or nickel as collector metals. In this case the base metals (Cu, Pb, Ni) have, although high in tonnage, a more byproduct character. At Umicore Precious Metals Refining, Hoboken (Belgium), printed wiring boards (PWBs) or PWB-containing fractions, ICs, processors, connectors and small electronic devices like mobile phones (after removal of the battery) containing typically approximately up to 350 Feed materials are smelted in a Cu-ISA reactor (ISASMELT™ technology) at about 1200 The main processing steps of the BMO are blast furnace, lead refinery and special metals refinery. The Pb-rich copper slag of the Cu-ISA reactor is smelted in a Pb blast furnace together with further Pb-containing raw materials to impure Pb bullion, Ni speiss, Cu matte and depleted Pb slag. PMs collected in the impure Pb bullion and the Ni speiss are separated in form of further PM/Ag residues via Specific processes have been developed for recycling of different catalysts ( Carbon-based catalysts: These (bearings: C; depletions: 0.5–5% Pd, Pt, Rh, Ru, Pd/Pt) are processed using incineration prior to the dissolution stage. Powder-based catalysts: These (bearings: CaCO Reforming or hydrogenation catalysts: These (bearings: Al Automotive catalysts: These (bearings: Al Organic-based homogenous spent catalysts: These catalysts from, e.g. chemical or pharmaceutical industries, can be treated by distillation and precipitation. The gaseous emissions are treated in an afterburner. REMs are a moderately abundant group of 17 elements comprising the 15 lanthanides (also referred to as lanthanoids), which comprise elements with atomic numbers 57–71; scandium; and yttrium. REMs can be classified as either light rare earth elements (LREE: 57 (lanthanum) through 64 (gadolinium)) or heavy rare earth elements (HREE: 65 (terbium) through 71 (lutetium)). Yttrium (atomic number 39) is included as an HREE even though it is not part of the lanthanide contraction series. Scandium (atomic number 21), a transition metal, is the lightest REM, but it is not classified as one of the group of LREE nor one of the HREE ( Just as there are many different elements among the REMs, there are many different uses as well; the most important ones are as follows (       Regardless of the (quite dissipative) end use, REMs are not recycled in large quantities, but could be if recycling became mandated or very high prices of REMs made recycling feasible (  The recycling of REEs could be considered a very uncommon issue until today and focused mostly on small quantities of preconsumer NdFeB-permanent magnet scrap ( Preconsumer permanent magnet scrap (swarf and residue) is estimated to represent 20–30% of the manufactured starting alloy ( In-plant recycling activities are reported from NEOMAX group (Hitachi Metals Ltd) including plants in Japan and other countries ( Cutting sludge (metallic powder coated with oxides) is roasted to completely oxidize the Further possible recycling methods, which are under development, are summarized in The recycling of REMs from NiMH battery scrap is in its infancy. Mostly these battery types, consisting of approximately 36–42% Ni, 22–25% Fe, 8–10% REMs and 3–4% Co, are recycled with assumption of REMs lost in slags. In 2011, Umicore (Hoboken, Belgium) and Rhodia (La Rochelle, France) jointly developed a unique pyro-/hydrometallurgical process for REMs recycling from rechargeable battery scrap ( Metal alloy—Co, Ni, Cu, Fe Slag fraction—Al, Li, Mn, REM Gas emissions—flue dust (only fraction landfilled) The batteries themselves fuel the smelter as their combustible compounds heat the smelter to a high enough temperature that, in combination with a gas cleaning system, ensures no volatile organic compounds (VOCs) or dioxins are emitted. The alloy is further refined in an existing hydrometallurgical process to produce a variety of Co- and Ni-containing materials for use in new batteries and other applications. Recently a hydrometallurgical process was developed to extract a REM concentrate from the slag for further refining rare earth oxides by Rhodia (France) to recover these critical elements. The rest of the slag is valorized by use in construction materials, including Li, whose recovery is currently uneconomical. The recovery of REOs is a business secret; Rhodia patented these process steps together with corresponding waste categories. In different solvent extraction units, rare earths are separated comparable to conventional REMs winning processes for geogenic resources. In summary, the battery recycling process described exceeds the 50% recycling Industrial recycling of REMs from phosphors scrap will start in 2013 by Rhodia (France) ( The principal use for scandium (Sc) is in aluminum alloys for aerospace components and sporting equipment (baseball and softball bats). Other uses for scandium include analytical standards, electronics, high-intensity metal halide lamps, lasers, metallurgical research and oil-well tracers. Demand for scandium increased slightly in 2012. Global scandium consumption was estimated to be less than 10 Yttrium (Y) is consumed mainly in the form of high-purity oxide compounds for phosphors ( The world consumption of yttrium, associated with most rare earth deposits, grew rapidly in the last 25 years; in 2012 world mine production was estimated to be 8900 The group of electronic metals has not yet been officially defined. In the context of the present document, it will include the following metals: gallium (Ga), In and Te. All are used as key metals in numerous electronic devices and were classified as “critical raw materials for the EU” by the European Commission in 2010 (see With a share of above 99%, most gallium globally consumed is used as a compound with arsenic (GaAs) for optoelectronic devices (laser diodes, LEDs, photodetectors, solar cells) and integrated circuits (defense applications, high-performance computers, telecommunications) or with nitrogen (GaN) for optoelectronic devices (laser diodes, LEDs). Integrated circuits account for 71% of domestic consumption, optoelectronics for the remaining 29%. Owing to the strong growth of LEDs, laser diodes, smartphones, photodetectors and solar cells, Ga consumption increased rapidly in the last 10 years; in 2012 world primary gallium production was estimated to be 273 Recycling activities for gallium in Canada, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States are mainly focused on new scrap generated in the manufacture of GaAs-based devices. It was estimated that 50% of gallium consumed worldwide in 2010 came from recycled sources ( Production of indium tin oxide (ITO) for flat-panel display devices (74%) and for architectural glass (10%) is the leading global end use of indium, followed by solders (10%) for temperature indicators in fire-control systems; minor alloys (3%) used for surface coatings of optical lenses, bonding agents between nonmetallic materials and for dental- resp. white gold alloys; other applications (3%) include, for example, intermetallic compounds that are used as semiconductors for laser diodes or indium in nuclear reactor control rods. World refinery production of indium has increased more than 5-fold in the last 20 years, when world production amounted to 70–120 Recycling possibilities for indium are limited. Indeed the EOL recycling rate is very small (<1%) but the recycled content, the fraction of secondary metal in the total metal input to metal production, reaches values between 25% and 50% ( At Umicore Precious Metals Refining, Hoboken, Belgium, indium is recovered from electronic scrap (crushed flat-panel displays, solders, etc.) and residues from historical zinc refinery residues among other numerous rare metals ( Indium compounds that are charged to the (ISA-)smelter will account to the lead-bearing slag that is subsequently reduced in the lead blast furnace to indium-containing lead bullion. During lead refining it is oxidized selectively into the lead refinery slag via the Harris process, in which a Na Tellurium is increasingly used in cadmium–tellurium-based solar cells (40%). In thermoelectrics (30%), e.g. semiconducting, bismuth telluride is used in cooling devices. In metallurgy (15%), tellurium serve as a free-machining additive in steel, is used to improve machinability while not reducing conductivity in copper, to improve resistance to vibration and fatigue in lead, to help control the depth of chill in cast iron and in malleable iron as a carbide stabilizer. In rubber formulation (5%), tellurium is used as a vulcanizing agent and as an accelerator. Other applications (10%) include the use in catalysts for synthetic fiber production, in blasting caps and as a pigment to produce blue and brown colors in ceramics and glass. World refinery consumption of tellurium was estimated to be about 500–550 Tellurium recycling is still embryonic but growing steadily (<10% of supply); recovery of industrial scrap from the photovoltaic (PV) industry provides a growing stream of secondary tellurium expected to represent about 7% of total tellurium in 2010, decreasing though over time as deposition processes for photovoltaics become more efficient and its growth is leveling off ( For traditional uses, there is little or no old scrap from which to extract secondary tellurium, because these uses of tellurium were nearly all dissipative. A very small amount of tellurium was recovered from scrapped selenium–tellurium photoreceptors employed in older plain paper copiers in Europe. The global EOL recycling rate of tellurium was estimated to be very small (<1%, ( Refractory metals (RMs) are high melting point metals that are characterized by other special physical and chemical properties, such as high density, inertness, corrosion and acid resistance. They are produced both as metal ingot (buttons) using electron beam furnaces and as metal powder that serves as raw material for powder metallurgical treatments like pressing and sintering. The definition of which elements belong to this group differs. As defined at the EU level (     Hard metals and metal carbide powder that can further be treated by powder metallurgical methods to produce hard metal tools are, with a proportion of 50%, the main application fields for W (in 2012 mine production: 73,000       Because of the large number of available secondary raw materials, especially metal oxides from the production of stainless steel (dusts), the recovery of ferroalloys, mainly ferrochrome, has become an important part of the ferroalloy industry ( Spent petroleum catalysts are regarded as the most important catalysts for recycling of Mo and V owing to the large volume and value of metals they contain. These also named hydroprocessing catalysts, account for about one-third of total worldwide catalyst consumption and are widely used in the petroleum refining industry for mild hydrogenation and removal of heteroatoms such as sulfur, nitrogen and oxygen, as well as metals like nickel and vanadium. Typically they contain: 2–10% Mo, 0–13% V, 0.5–4% Co, 0.5–10% Ni, 10% S, 10% C on a porous Al The recovery of molybdenum and of the vanadium content can involve the following process steps ( Thermal pretreatment with initial heating in air at 600 A (pressure) leaching step resulting in preferential solubilization of molybdate and vanadate, leaving the nickel cobalt alumina as a solid. Separation of the molybdenum and vanadium. Treatment of the Ni/Co alumina residue to recover the nickel and cobalt content. The technical and economic effort depends on the type of catalyst (metal content, type of carrier, chemical compounds, impurities, etc.) and quality requirements for the recycled products. Besides the fact that vanadium recycled from spent petroleum catalysts is significant ( Hydrometallurgical methods provide ecological/economic advantages compared to pyrometallurgical. V content of the slag is dissolved by direct alkaline pressure leaching under oxidizing conditions. V can be recovered as ammonium vanadate from the leach liquor by conventional neutralization and precipitation steps.  The biggest handicap for increasing the very low EOL recycling rate for tantalum (<1%) lies in the main application field of Ta in the form of capacitors (>60%), which are in fact not recycled ( Growing titanium production has also increased the availability of Clean and sorted scrap is usually introduced into the remelting step of the primary route to produce titanium ingots: while loose scrap can be used for cold hearth melting without further preparation, vacuum arc remelting in specially designed furnaces mix the scrap with titanium sponge and compress it to electrodes. Batches of titanium (mostly preconsumer) scrap and titanium sponge are mixed and pressed to form blocks. The blocks are welded together to produce a consumable electrode. The electrode is then installed in the furnace chamber in a manner where a cooled copper crucible that collects the molten titanium encloses the bottom end of the electrode. An arc is struck between the lower end of the electrode and the bottom of the crucible and the electrode is moved downward as it is consumed ( At IME (Process Metallurgy and Metal Recycling—Department and Chair of RWTH Aachen University, Germany), intensive research was carried out to develop and assess a closed loop recycling process for titanium-aluminide scrap (γ-TiAl), which is currently downgraded as a deoxidation agent in steel production. Those alloys receive special attention of the technical community owing to their applications in automotive turbochargers and the low-pressure turbines of the most recent aero engines. The IME Recycling Process fits their sensitive metallurgical requirements and reduces material processing cost significantly. It comprises vacuum induction melting (VIM) or aluminothermic reduction (ATR) followed by pressure electroslag remelting (PESR) and/or vacuum arc remelting (VAR) ( The application of PESR using “active slags” leads to a refinement and in particular to a reduction in oxygen content, which impacts greatly on the mechanical properties. γ-TiAl-scrap remelted by VIM with an oxygen contamination of 3000 Lithium is used in battery production (22–33%), in the glass/ceramic industry (26–30%), in the production of lubricating greases (11–14%), for air treatment (4–5%), as an additive in continuous-casting processes (4%), in molten-salt electrolysis for primary aluminum production (2–4%) and other The widespread and constantly increasing use of Li ion batteries in the last two decades leads to an increased battery scrap generation, which is the only one of interest for lithium recycling up to now. Li ion batteries contain high amounts of valuable metals, but since all battery producers sell their own specific types it is difficult to specify exact metal contents in battery scrap mixtures ( Various battery recycling projects under development can basically be divided into pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical and hybrid (combined) processes. Besides utilization of specialized battery recycling processes, the addition of spent batteries to existing large-scale processes, which are not dedicated to battery recycling (e.g. extractive cobalt or nickel metallurgy), is common practice and very often an economical advantage ( Simplified flow charts of the potential recycling routes for (hybrid) electric vehicle battery scrap ((H)EV) are illustrated in Most antimony is used in form of trioxide (Sb Traditionally antimony is recycled from lead–acid battery scrap, alloy scrap or WEEE and is recovered as antimonial lead to be again consumed by the battery industry with EOL recycling rates between 10 and 25% ( The increasing use in flame retardants is a dissipative application without possible recycling. The availability of recyclable EOL scrap (spent lead–acid batteries with Sb) is decreasing. The traditionally incoming low-quality Pb/Sb mixed oxide is not suitable as an ingredient for flame retardants. This trend will continue in future and thus the recycling rate will decline.