The peridotite section of the Samail Ophiolite in the Sultanate of Oman offers insight into the feasibility of mineral carbonation for engineered, in situ geological CO2 storage in mantle peridotites. Naturally occurring CO2 sequestration via mineral carbonation is well-developed in the peridotite; however, the natural process captures and sequesters CO2 too slowly to significantly impact the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere. A reaction path model was developed to simulate in situ CO2 mineralization through carbonation of fresh peridotite, with its composition based on that of mantle peridotite in the Samail Ophiolite and including dissolution kinetics for primary minerals. The model employs a two-stage technique, beginning with an open system and progressing to three different closed system scenarios- a natural system at 30°C, an engineered CO2 injection scenario at 30°C, and an engineered CO2 injection scenario at 90°C. The natural system model reproduces measured aqueous solute concentrations in the target water, signifying the model is a close approximation of the natural process. Natural system model results suggest that the open system achieves steady state within a few decades, while the closed system may take up to 6,500years to reach observed fluid compositions. The model also identifies the supply of dissolved inorganic carbon as the limiting factor for natural CO2 mineralization in the deep subsurface. Engineered system models indicate that injecting CO2 at depth could enhance the rate of CO2 mineralization by a factor of over 16,000. CO2 injection could also increase mineralization efficiency – kilograms of CO2 sequestered per kilogram of peridotite – by a factor of over 350. These model estimates do not include the effects of precipitation kinetics or changes in permeability and reactive surface area due to secondary mineral precipitation. Nonetheless, the faster rate of mineralization in the CO2 injection models implies that enhanced in situ peridotite carbonation could be a significant sink for atmospheric CO2.Recently, greater attention has been given to carbon capture and storage (CCS) in geologic formations as a method for helping prevent the rise of CO Both basalt and peridotite have been suggested as host formations for Lab experiments suggest that in freshwater solutions, carbonation rates of peridotite are much faster than basalt due to the high concentration of olivine: at the pH and temperature relevant for Flood basalts may be structurally favorable for CO Before preference is given to either rock type, our understanding of the mineralization process would benefit from further examination of both its kinetics and thermodynamics. For instance, The thermodynamic properties of relevant minerals and aqueous species also require further scrutiny. The thermodynamic database developed at Lawrence Livermore National Lab that is often used in reaction path modeling is extensive, but not all-encompassing. Studies focusing on particular species often involve updating the thermodynamic database for those species at the temperature and pressure of the study, as There are several open questions relating to What are the timescales associated with natural and engineered What are the limiting factors in natural and engineered Could the process be enhanced to make CO This paper aims to address some aspects of these questions as they relate to peridotite carbonation by focusing on the ongoing natural CO The peridotite aquifer of the Samail Ophiolite in the Sultanate of Oman is a site of exceptionally well-developed naturally occurring Natural At the same time, interaction with soil CO The dissolution reactions also consume protons, raising the pH as high as 12. This results in an alkaline Ca Overall, the system forms abundant carbonate minerals, both in the subsurface and in surficial travertine terraces, and thus sequesters CO In Oman, unlike other alkaline spring localities such as California or Italy, Type II spring waters also have elevated Na In January 2009 and 2010, 51 water samples were collected from 13 sites: 10 alkaline spring sites and 3 wells set in peridotite ( Water samples were collected in new or triple rinsed syringes and filtered using sterile Acrodisc 0.8/0.2 Additionally, 19 mineral samples were collected from 3 of the alkaline spring sites. The samples were taken from areas of active precipitation or deposition at or near spring discharge areas, including crystalline films atop alkaline spring pools, white floc from the bottom of pools, and deposits forming rippled terraces in areas of faster water flow, such as on steeper slopes. Mineral samples were collected in new, sterile, polyethylene sample bags. Major anions (Cl The collected mineral samples were dried in an oven at 40 Field data and the chemical composition of the collected water samples are summarized in Along a surface flowpath, alkaline waters show little change in water chemistry from their spring discharge points, with the exception of Ca Mineral saturation states in samples of alkaline spring water and shallow groundwater from wells and afalaj were calculated using EQ3NR, the speciation-solubility code in EQ3/6, v. 8.0 ( Shallow groundwater samples are saturated with respect to aragonite, calcite, magnesite, and quartz, oversaturated with respect to dolomite and chrysotile, and undersaturated with respect to hydromagnesite, brucite, and magnetite ( Semi-quantitative analysis of XRD results for mineral samples shows that active precipitation is primarily calcium carbonate (aragonite and/or calcite) with minor amounts of brucite and – in one location – a hydrated Mg carbonate ( These physical structures and mineral compositions result from two surficial carbonation mechanisms described by There was one alkaline spring site which yielded unusual mineral samples: Misbit. Every sample from this location contained a hydrated Mg-carbonate, with the exception of the crystalline film atop the spring. Samples from Misbit were 40–98% calcium carbonate, 2–60% hydrated Mg-carbonate, and 0–1% brucite. The chemical composition of the hydrated Mg-carbonate has yet to be measured so the specific mineral is not known, but likely possibilities are hydrotalcite or pyroaurite. Unlike all of our other alkaline spring sites, Misbit lies in a catchment underlain by mixed peridotite and gabbro. The different rock composition may affect the chemistry of the groundwater and secondary mineral precipitation. In order to better understand the mechanisms of natural mineral carbonation in the peridotite of the Samail Ophiolite aquifer, a reaction path model was developed for the system. The model is based on that developed by The reaction path model was performed using EQ3/6, v.8.0 ( The input water was introduced into the model and tracked as it interacted with peridotite in a system open to atmospheric exchange, with CO Models were run using the fluid-centered flow-through physical system, as recommended by The modeled peridotite is comprised of olivine (forsterite–fayalite solid solution), enstatite, and diopside. Spinel is also a primary mineral in peridotite of the Samail Ophiolite, but was not included in the model because field observations of relict spinels in otherwise altered peridotite indicate that spinel is commonly unaltered ( Models were run using primary mineral dissolution kinetics, which are assumed to be the rate limiting step for both dissolution and secondary mineral precipitation. The dissolution rates for olivine (forsterite and fayalite) were calculated from empirically derived data found in In the open system model, magnesite and dolomite precipitation were suppressed because field observations do not support their existence in the near-surface. Neither mineral is observed in areas around shallow groundwater. Additionally, if both minerals are allowed to precipitate in the open system, the modeled Mg The open system model attains steady state after 30 The closed system model does not reach a stable aqueous composition. After the cessation of carbonate precipitation, there are no mechanisms for Ca At the beginning of the closed system model, large amounts of magnesite and dolomite form because they both were suppressed in the open system and became oversaturated. Unsuppressing them in the closed system allows them to precipitate, eliminating that oversaturation. This rapid formation of carbonates at the beginning of the closed system causes the pH to decrease from 8.9 to 7.9. After that initial pH drop, the pH begins to rise and continues to do so for the rest of the model. Including precipitation kinetics in the closed system model would prolong the interval of magnesite and dolomite precipitation. For comparison, the model was run incorporating precipitation kinetics for magnesite, dolomite, and calcite (using the rate from Though the effects of precipitation kinetics are interesting, they were not included in central model results because rates for precipitation of magnesite and dolomite at low temperature are not well-understood. In lab experiments at low temperature (< In order to assess how well the model simulates natural Modeled trends in DIC for the open system are similar to those seen in the field in surface and shallow groundwater, but in the closed system the DIC concentration decreases far below the values seen in alkaline springs ( The modeled progression of Ca Another method for evaluating how well the model approximates reaction processes in the natural system is to compare mineral saturation states produced in the model to those of actual water samples. Saturation states in the open system output water can be compared to those in shallow groundwater, while saturation states in the closed system output water can be compared to those in alkaline spring water. When comparing the saturation states of minerals in samples and models, it is important to remember that the model will not achieve oversaturation unless a mineral is suppressed. Unlike the real world, in the model there are no kinetic constraints on precipitation of secondary minerals, so precipitation proceeds as soon as saturation is reached. Therefore, an affinity of zero in a model can be considered equivalent to that of either saturation or oversaturation in a sample.  The saturation states for the open system agree with those of shallow groundwater samples for aragonite, calcite, dolomite, and brucite, but not for other secondary minerals. Chrysotile is at saturation in the model, but oversaturated in shallow groundwater. As noted above, this may be due to kinetic limitations on precipitation in the natural system. Quartz is undersaturated in the model but at saturation in the shallow groundwater. The ready precipitation of chrysotile in the model may also explain this discrepancy: in the model, chrysotile precipitation removes dissolved Si that would otherwise accumulate in the water, thus preventing quartz saturation from being reached. Magnetite is at saturation in the model, but undersaturated in shallow groundwater. As mentioned before, in the natural system, during peridotite alteration some of the Fe The saturation states of minerals in the closed system water show similarities to those of alkaline spring water. Hydromagnesite, magnesite, and quartz are all undersaturated in both the model and alkaline spring water, though the level of undersaturation is much higher in the model. Brucite, chrysotile and magnetite are all oversaturated in alkaline spring water, and at saturation in in the model, again implying kinetic constraints on precipitation in the natural system. However, the Ca-rich carbonates- calcite, aragonite, and dolomite- are all at saturation in alkaline spring water but undersaturated in the model. The difference between the saturation state of Ca-rich carbonates in the field samples and in the closed system model may indicate that the spring water is not contained in a purely closed system until it reaches the surface. The modeled water is isolated from any sources of C and thus all carbonates remain undersaturated, but– as previously mentioned– prior to emerging, the spring water may have taken up CO The Samail natural system model was expanded to include CO In both engineered systems, most aqueous species achieve steady state concentrations within 5 The change from precipitation of chrysotile and brucite in the natural closed system to magnesite and quartz in the CO The fact that inorganic C is a limiting factor in the natural system suggests one could enhance mineralization by increasing the supply of CO In addition to increasing CO In addition to increasing the total amount of CO The reasons for the increase in CO All models show a positive volume increase, ranging from 45-50% in the natural system to almost 80% in the CO It should be noted that the models discussed in this paper provide a limited view of CO Another limitation of the models is their simplification of reaction kinetics. The models assume that dissolution of primary minerals is the rate-limiting step, but this may not always be the case (particularly with regard to precipitation of magnesite and dolomite). Reaction kinetics are further simplified by assuming a constant specific reactive surface area. In a porosity regime dominated by fractures, such as that expected in the Samail Ophiolite aquifer, the reactive surface area can be assumed to be the amount of rock exposed to fluid by fractures. It is difficult to estimate the starting value for this reactive surface area, and the value used in the model is probably a considerable underestimate. The 0.7 A reactive transport model incorporating local hydrology and changes in reactive surface area, porosity, and permeability over the course of the mineral carbonation process could provide a more complete picture of both natural CO  The natural system model provides a useful representation of the evolution of water in the peridotite aquifers of the Samail Ophiolite: from surface water, to shallow Mg The open system model is characterized by precipitation of hydromagnesite, calcite, chrysotile, and magnetite, while the closed system model is characterized by precipitation of chrysotile, brucite and magnetite, with a brief period of abundant magnesite, dolomite, and calcite precipitation in the initial stages of reaction progress. The open system model reaches steady state within a few decades, while the closed system model continues to evolve with time, taking 6500 The amount of CO Injecting CO Increasing the temperature of a CO CO We would like to extend special thanks for their generosity to everyone at the Ministry of Regional Municipalities and Water Resources, Sultanate of Oman, particularly Salim Al Khanbashi and Dr. Abdulaziz Ali-AL-Mashikhi, and everyone at the Geological Survey of Oman and the Directorate General of Minerals in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, particularly Dr. Ali Al Rajhi and Dr. Salim Al Busaidi. We thank Lisa Streit, Peter Canovas, Evelyn Mervine, and Alison Keimowitz for help during the 2009–2011 field seasons, and Martin Stute for advice in the lab. This work was supported through the