Comparison of the chemical compositions of Martian soils reveals distinct mixing trends, resulting from admixture of variable amounts of sulfate/chloride cement at Viking landing sites and of the local andesitic rock fragments at the Mars Pathfinder site. These trends, most easily visualized in plots of oxides versus SO3, intersect approximately at a common composition, thought to represent a global dust that has been homogenized by pervasive aeolian activity. The source rocks that were weathered to produce the global dust are inferred to have been basalts rather than felsic rocks, based on the observation that the dust lies along well-established chemical weathering trends for terrestrial basalts. The basaltic protolith was chemically similar (e.g., high Fe/Mg, low Al2O3) to basaltic shergottite meteorites. Chemical changes during the weathering of Martian basaltic rocks are apparently not as drastic as in terrestrial weathering, perhaps because of evaporation of hydrous fluids that leave soluble components behind in the residue. Comparison with chemical trends for previously proposed Martian soil-formation mechanisms suggests that palagonitization of basalts more readily explains the dust composition than do hydrothermal alteration at higher temperatures or reactions of rocks with an acid fog produced by volcanic exhalations. Local or temporal processing of dust into soil involves not only cementation by salts and mixing with rock fragments, but also chemical fractionations of Fe2O3/TiO2 presumably resulting from aeolian sorting by grain size and density. If the global dust represents a broad average of the Martian surficial or upper crustal composition, the planet’s surface geology is dominated by basaltic volcanic rocks and evaporitic salts.The Martian regolith, consisting of drifts and dunes of fine dust and sand atop variably indurated soil and rock fragments, has defied attempts to determine its nature and origin. (Note: Here we use the term It seems almost impertinent to attempt to understand a planetary regolith that has been analyzed at only three locations, albeit separated by thousands of kilometers. However, the soils at all these sites are broadly similar in composition Preliminary Mars Pathfinder APXS soil analyses (A-2, A-4, A-5, A-8, A-10, A-15) were reported by Several other corrections to published Pathfinder soil data, based on on-going recalibration of the X-ray detector, have been reported in abstract form. Unlike Pathfinder soil analyses, which represent the compositions of the uppermost few tens or hundreds of microns of mostly undisturbed surface samples, Viking analyses are bulk soils collected from up to several centimeters depth. Because of the high rate of dust accumulation on the surface (e.g., Viking XRF data were taken from Table 2 of In principle, the Viking analyses may be absolute measurements because they used a backscatter reference on the landers to calibrate the total X-ray interaction of the target. However, because that peak is a scattering peak and the element peaks are emission signals, it is possible that various matrix effects and heterogeneities could bias the calibrations and lead to absorption or enhancement effects The sum of oxide equivalents in the original Viking data is ≈90% Many spectral studies suggest that the Martian surface is characterized by mixtures of mafic igneous rocks and highly altered dust and soil on a broad scale (e.g., All the chemically analyzed Pathfinder soils were cloddy; although drifts were present at the site, they were not analyzed. Several geochemical components, identified generically as “silicates” and “sulfate/chloride salts,” were recognized in the original analyses of Viking soils The compositions of Pathfinder rock samples tend to form nearly linear arrays when plotted as oxides versus SO In the following oxide or element versus SO In all these figures, the Pathfinder soil data are somewhat “noisy” but appear to be roughly distributed along the rock plus soil regression lines. It seems plausible, then, to attribute this compositional variation to admixture of small fragments of the local andesitic rock in the soil. The scatter might arise from inclusion of some rock fragments of other compositions as well, possibly conglomerates that have been suggested to occur at the site Our preferred model, then, is that the Pathfinder and Viking arrays arise from distinct processes: admixture of local, mostly andesitic rock fragments to dust deposits in the case of Pathfinder soils, and introduction of sulfate/chloride (salts) cement into dust deposits in the case of Chryse soils. If this model is correct, the high SO A graphic way to estimate the global dust composition is to determine the intersections of the regression lines, which should converge at or near these end-member compositions (as most do, see The arrays for the “salt” or “cement” components MgO and Cl intersect at lower SO The relative rock fractions in Pathfinder soils might be estimated from their SO The relationship between estimated rock fractions and red/blue spectra ratio is shown in Similarity in the compositions of Martian soil (corrected for excess S and Cl, possibly added by volcanic exhalations; Because of possible differences in weathering conditions and lava compositions on Earth and Mars, it may be misleading to use terrestrial sediments derived from volcanic rocks as an analogy for Martian soil. However, In Progressively more weathered materials in In Although the global dust composition in each diagram in Numerous alteration mechanisms for producing Martian soil have been proposed (summarized by The chemical trends defined by the studies cited above are shown in molar variation diagrams Despite concensus that a globally homogenized dust unit exists on Mars, studies of bright, presumably dust-covered regions of Mars at increasing spatial resolution have detected spectral heterogeneities and evidence of soil mobility (e.g., We have already identified several mixing processes by which global dust has been locally processed to make distinctive soils. At the Pathfinder site, dust has been mixed with fragments of the local rocks, commonly up to 20% by weight. This is consistent with observations of the mechanical breakdown of rocks such as Barnacle Bill Soils at the Viking sites exhibit varying amounts of cementation, presumably by sulfate/chloride salts. The origin of the salt components and their introduction into the soil is a subject with a long and contentious history. Possible sources of salt components include volcanic aerosols The most noticeable temporal changes at the Viking and Pathfinder sites were wind erosion and deposition. Viking time-series image data monitored two global dust storms, and surface brightening resulted from dust accumulation even during quiet periods  Because sediments usually sample broad areas and large volumes of exposed crust, terrestrial sediment compositions are commonly used to identify source terrane types Estimated erosion rates at spacecraft landing sites on Mars are very low In any case, the data clearly argue for pervasive source rocks with basaltic compositions, having chemical properties (e.g., high Fe/Mg, low Al Chemical compositions of soils at the Viking 1 and Mars Pathfinder landing sites show different effects of mixing. Viking soils contain varying amounts of sulfate and chloride salts, probably as cements. In contrast, compositional variations in Pathfinder soils arise from admixture of small fragments of the local andesitic rock, possibly with smaller amounts of other lithologies. The two mixing trends intersect approximately at a common composition, which probably represents a globally homogeneous dust. The composition of the dust lies along weathering trends for terrestrial basaltic rocks. Thus, basalt rather than andesite or other felsic lithologies appears to be the most plausible source rock for the dust. Limited chemical changes during alteration may suggest that most soluble components were not transported away but remained in the soil when an altering hydrous fluid evaporated. An assessment of chemical trends resulting from palagonitization, hydrothermal alteration, and acid fog reactions suggests that palagonite may be the best analogy for Martian soils. Local processes have also influenced the compositions of soils. Besides admixture of rock fragments and cements to dust deposits, aeolian fractionation of denser Fe–Ti oxides appears to have occurred, as judged from changes in Fe The composition of global dust may either reflect the surface abundance of source rocks or their volumes within the upper crust. The dust composition implies that basalts, with similar chemical characteristics to basaltic shergottites, and evaporitic salts (sulfates and chlorides) dominate the planet’s surface geology. If the global dust composition evolves with time, the present dust might be derived from source rocks dominated by relatively young volcanic materials. We have benefited from discussions with Ben Clark, Rodey Batiza, Scott McLennan, Jeff Taylor, and Dan Britt, and from thoughtful anonymous reviews. This is Hawaii Institute of Geophysics and Planetology publication #1081 and School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology publication #4895. This work was supported in part by NASA/JPL Mars Mission Data Analysis grant 1204905 to H. Y. M., and NASA Cosmochemistry grant NAG 5-4212 to K. K.