Five samples of aluminium foam-wrapped tubular heat exchanger are being tested for heat transfer performance and pressure drop characteristics. The foam layer has thickness (or height) varied from 5 mm to 20 mm. The tests are carried out on each heat exchanger, installed horizontally in a cross-flow arrangement inside an open circuit wind tunnel, one at a time with air velocity varying between 0.5 and 5 m/s. Heat transfer rate from 75 °C hot liquid, circulating through the core tube, to external air is evaluated. These results, together with temperature differential between the ambient air and the foam surface, allow evaluation of the overall thermal resistance. Pressure drops across each sample are recorded. The performance of the foam heat exchangers is assessed by comparing their thermo-hydraulic results against those of a conventional finned tube with similar dimensions and tested under the same conditions. The results show that, within the designated air velocity range, the foam heat exchangers with thicker foam layer perform better than those with thinner foam layer. However, the heat transfer advantage does not increase linearly with foam thickness – signifying the existence of an optimum thickness when an increase in pressure drop at increased air velocity is taken into account. Finally, the correlations to predict the overall thermal resistance and pressure drop are presented.area, [m specific heat capacity at constant pressure, [J/kg K] strut diameter, [m] core tube internal diameter, [m] core tube external diameter, [m] foam or fin annulus internal diameter = foam or fin annulus external diameter, [m] diameter ratio = dimensional height, [m] convective heat transfer coefficient, [W/m thermal conductivity, [W/m K] dimensional length, [m] mass flow rate, [kg/s] Nusselt number, [–] pressure, [Pa] total heat transfer, [W] thermal resistance, [K/W] thermal resistance, [–] Reynolds number sum of residual square, [–] foam thickness or fin height, [m] fin thickness, [m] fin pitch, [m] wall thickness of the core tube, [m] temperature, [K] air velocity, [m/s] dimensional width, [m] dependent variable representing Δ convective heat transfer coefficient, [W/m interfacial surface area, [m least squares method proportional – integral – derivative feedback control particle image velocimetry number of pores per inch, [technically in resistance temperature detector thermal contact resistance, [K/W] differential of empirical constants kinematic viscosity, [m density, [kg/m surface-to-volume ratio, [m porosity, [–] efficiency function of foam, [–] air side of a contact between fin or foam and the core tube relating to convective heat transfer of air or liquid side relating to conductive heat transfer of the core tube wall of the liquid side of a surface overall, total of the free air stream Metal foams are highly porous materials consisting of mostly interconnected and randomly distributed voids called ‘cells’. Typically, a cell approximate shape and form is a near-spherical polyhedron having 14 faces. Each cell face forms an open passage called ‘pore’ to adjacent surrounding cells in all directions. The porous structure as described therefore makes metal foam permeable, and provides very well-mixed patterns, to fluid flows in macroscopic scale. In addition, the solid backbone micro-features maintaining the existence of all cells and pores – termed ‘struts’ (or ‘ligaments’, or ‘fibres’) and nodes (where struts join) – have a combined effect resulting in a very high interfacial surface area between the void and its solid backbone. T’Joen et al. Due to their other unique properties of high strength, high absorption to impact, low weight, excellent noise attenuation, etc. Prior research of interest to this present study are those involving heat exchangers of tubular design. Lu et al. In parallel to Lu et al. Mahjoob and Vafai Jamin and Mohamad A metal foam tube bundle based on a single row of aluminium foam heat exchangers was studied by T’Joen et al. In forming a foam based heat exchanger, different techniques are employed to attached the foam materials to its tubular core or flat substrate. De Jaeger et al. The main objective of the present study is to evaluate thermo-hydraulic performances of single tubular aluminium foam heat exchangers. Focus is given to assessing their heat transfer and pressure drop characteristics resulting from different foam materials, heights, and bonding methods between the foam and the wall of solid core cylinder. This work forms a small part of a project aimed at identifying best design of a single tube, and further evaluating their performance in bundle configurations, taking economic factors into consideration. The target application of heat exchangers studied in the next stage, in their best configured bundle form, is an air-cooled condenser in a typical low temperature turbine cycle for geothermal power plants. Geothermal energy is a potentially feasible option in Australia for a base load power generation. However, geothermal resources are located in remote locations with limited cooling water availability. To overcome this barrier and remain viable economically, it is envisaged that rejecting waste heat from geothermal power plants in this context must rely heavily on a dry cooling system. The finned heat exchanger was manufactured in-house at the QGECE mechanical workshop. An aluminium solid bar of a length 580 mm was machined to form the finned external structure. There are 89 annular fins spread across the total length of 440 mm, each with the thickness of 0.6 mm ( There are five samples of foam covered heat exchanger all using foam layer having 20 PPI pore density. Among them, four samples are made of the same foam type but with a different thickness; viz., 5 mm, 12 mm, 15 mm, and 20 mm. The core tube of each sample in this set is an aluminium cylinder with external diameter All foam wrapped heat exchangers, shown in The test facility is an open circuit wind tunnel shown in The hot air exits the tunnel through an elbow bend which diverts the air stream out of the system via the ceiling (8). Just before the elbow, the suction blower is installed in-line and the driving shaft extends out to the prime driver which is a large 17 kW DC motor. The constriction section (4) has one pressure ring at its inlet, immediately after the flow settler, and another at the exit where it joins the test section. The pressure differentials of the two rings are input to a transducer which generates a signal to drive the control unit of the blower motor. The air velocity is controlled by a PID closed-loop control strategy implemented using LabVIEW software suite. Before the test, the chosen range of air velocity from 0.5 m/s to 5.0 m/s is verified by a Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) (6) under the empty chamber condition. PIV is an accurate, non-intrusive technique for determining the air velocity and its application in this work is described in a separate study by Khashehchi et al. The test section has its cross-sectional areas measured 454 mm × 454 mm at the inlet and 462 mm × 462 mm at the exit. It is 1220 mm long and divided into three compartments horizontally by two sets of flexi-glass baffle (see On the liquid side, a hot liquid mixture, made of 1 part glycol +2 parts water by volume, is heated and maintained at 75 °C by a heater unit (5). The hot liquid is circulated around a closed-circuit through the core tube of the heat exchanger by an in-line pump installed in series with an accurate volumetric flow meter. Liquid inlet and exit temperatures are measured by installing two K-Type thermocouples, each on the inlet and exit metal fittings with the tip of the probe sitting at the centre of the liquid stream. They are calibrated against a FLUKE-9142 Field Metrology Well to an accuracy of 0.001 °C. Data logging and control of different parts of the system such as air velocity and exit air temperature scanning are co-ordinated by a host computer. The data file logs air inlet and exit temperatures, hot liquid inlet and exit temperatures, liquid flow rate, and pressure drop across the test specimen. Before testing the foam-wrapped specimens, a plain aluminium cylinder ( For each specimen under test, The air flow is set to 0.5 m/s and the liquid temperature at heat exchanger inlet is monitored until it is settled within 75 ± 0.75 C, all relevant data are logged every second for 10 min. The air flow is then increased to the next step of 0.5 m/s increment and when the liquid temperature re-settles, the process is repeated until air flow reaches 5.0 m/s. Thermal energy exchange analysis follows theoretical formulation of related parameters for forced convection around a cylinder in a cross flow. As the hot liquid mixture enters the heat exchanger core and flows to the exit, it loses heat to the cooler air stream flowing past the heat exchanger external surface. The air is forced to flow at varying velocity by the suction fan. Only the exchange of thermal energy occurring inside the test section is taken into account as the heat loss outside the test section is found negligibly small. Total heat transfer, Δ This present report adopts a concept taken by the authors such as Cavallini et al. The effect of net radiation heat transfer between the heat exchangers and their surroundings inside the test section is insignificant and therefore not included in the calculation. With this assumption, the overall thermal resistance All heat exchangers used are new specimens and resistance due to fouling both on the liquid side and air side can be excluded. With this assumption, The last term of Equation Heat transfer performance of all specimens in this study is reported in terms of individual overall thermal resistance, The plot of thermal resistance against air velocity is shown by The effect of different surface types on heat transfer can be assessed by comparing the results of Fin-15 mm and Foam-15 mm. In this comparison, the finned tube has no TCR between all its 89 annular fins and the core tube because the heat exchanger was made as a single piece from a solid aluminium round bar. In contrast the Foam-15 mm sample has the maximum TCR because the foam layer and the core tube were press-fit together. Press-fitting gives the highest TCR according to De Jaeger et al. Pressure drop data are purely measured values at two imaginary planes perpendicular to the direction of the air flow. The plane upstream locates at 200 mm away from the centre line of the test sample, and the one downstream locates 420 mm away from the same reference. At each plane, a pitot tube was installed from the top panel to the depth horizontally aligned with the centrelines of the test section and the heat exchanger tube being tested. The difference in total pressure between the two pitot tubes is taken as the pressure drop across the sample.  The foam materials covering all foam samples are of similar alloy ( Following the argument and expectation outlined above, pressure drop comparison of the two 5 mm foam tubes is well confirmed. The pressure drop is known to be affected by tangible, macroscopic properties of the specimens Over the whole range of designated air velocity, the general trend of foam thickness toward pressure drop it generates is as expected for all test samples. The sample with the highest add-on thickness generates the maximum pressure drop while those with the lowest thickness generate the minimum pressure drop. The curves diverge toward the maximum air velocity. The effect of different modified surface structure of the same thickness or height, i.e. foam 15 mm vs. finned 15 mm, to pressure drop is not significant – with the finned tends to cause less pressure drop especially toward the higher air velocities. For all samples, their pressure drop up to the air velocity of 3.5 m/s are not varied greatly apart. To visualize the combined effectiveness of the foam heat exchangers, thermo-hydraulic data of 15 mm foam are plotted in comparison with those of the 15 mm finned-tube. This is as shown in It should be noted, from the earlier discussion, that this plot represents the worst case performance of the foam tube and the best case for the finned counterpart. This is due to the foam tube having the maximum TCR and the finned tube having none. Nevertheless, it is seen here that the trends of the two curves diverge as the pressure drop increases. This shows that while the increase in rate of heat transfer Following methodology presented by Moffat Following the approach used by Hooman and Merrikh From all ten ( These correlations fit the general experimental data well with the pressure drop yielding a more accurate prediction. The maximum Δ Correlations in thermo-fluids are usually presented in non-dimensional forms. To adhere to this practice, Δ Equation For thermal resistance, since In this study five foam wrapped heat exchangers of tubular design are tested for their thermo-hydraulic performance using a finned tube of comparable dimensions as a benchmark sample. Available foam specimens allow the study of foam thickness effect on heat transfer and pressure drop. In addition, three different bonding methods applicable among six specimens in this study aid in interpreting data associated with respective specimens. The results show that, for thermal efficiency, overall thermal resistance decreases with the increase of foam layer thickness. However, this thermal advantage comes at the expense of increasing pressure drop. Depending on target applications, as a single tube, the resulting pressure drop may be acceptable as it does not differ significantly from that of current heat exchanger design. The foam wrapped heat exchanger with suitable foam thickness is seen to give heat transfer benefit while keeping the pressure drop at the same level as that causes by the finned tube. Experimental results are also helpful in developing correlations to predict relevant variables of interest. This study defines two correlations to predict pressure drop and thermal resistance using the same set of input parameters. Non-dimensional forms of these two variables are also presented. The authors are grateful to the