This study was designed to compare one-step, two-step and spent medium bioleaching of spent catalyst by adapted Aspergillus niger in batch cultures. Aspergillus niger, which was adapted to heavy metal ions, Ni, Mo, Fe, and W, was grown in medium containing up to 5% (w/v) of spent catalyst. The main lixiviant in bioleaching was gluconic acid, which was produced at all pulp densities in the one-step bioleaching process. Gluconic acid was also produced in the two-step bioleaching process when the spent catalyst was present at pulp densities greater than 1% (w/v). In the spent medium leaching, however, the primary agent was citric acid. The pulp density of the spent catalyst was varied, and this resulted in different amounts of solubilized metals. A total of 3% (w/v) spent catalyst generally produced maximum extraction yields in the one-step bioleaching process; the amounts of leached metals were 100% of W, 77.8% of Fe, 90.9% of Mo, 65.8% of Ni, and 14.2% of Al. The highest concentration of gluconic acid in this condition demonstrated that it was the primary bioleaching agent. Compared with chemical leaching at 1% pulp density, the fungus was more efficient at the leaching of W, Al, Mo, and Fe and equally efficient in the extraction of Ni.Rapid urbanization, industrialization and various technological innovations have created an increased need to dispose of industrial solid wastes, such as spent catalysts, fly ash, spent batteries and electronic scraps. Heavy metal pollution resulting from industrial solid waste disposal is a major environmental problem. These heavy metals are required by all life forms, but only in limited amounts. At high concentrations, heavy metal ions react to form toxic compounds in cells. Another major problem with metals is their indefinite persistence in the food chain ( Hydroprocessing catalysts are used extensively in the petroleum refining industry to produce clean fuels from petroleum distillates and residues. These catalysts usually consist of molybdenum (Mo) or tungsten (W) supported on an alumina or silica-alumina carrier with promoters, such as cobalt (Co) or nickel (Ni). The catalysts enhance the cracking and removal of undesirable impurities, such as sulfur, nitrogen and metals (V and Ni) present in the feed ( Bioleaching is a novel approach to recover metals from various solids. Bioleaching relies on the ability of microorganisms (bacteria and fungi) to transform solid compounds. This transformation occurs through the production of organic or inorganic acids, which results in soluble and extractable elements that can be recovered ( Comparisons of one-step and two-step bioleaching, as well as bioleaching by spent microbial culture, have been reported by several researchers, and the feasibility of the latter has been demonstrated. For industrial applications, bioleaching by spent culture is believed to be desirable to increase leaching efficiency ( The aim of this work was to compare metal recovery from tungsten-rich spent hydrocracking catalyst using different methods of bioleaching by an adapted Spent hydrocracking catalyst (Criterion HC-102 The microorganism used in this study was The elemental composition of the spent catalyst was determined using chemical analysis and X-ray fluorescence (XRF) (Philips, model: Magix Pro) ( Partial chemical composition was determined using a homemade method. Briefly, 0.02 to 0.05 The fungus from the final stage of adaptation with a mixture of metal ions was cultured in a potato dextrose agar (PDA, 3.9% (w/v)) slant. In order to obtain a sufficient number of spores, the culture was incubated at 30 In order to obtain a sufficient number of spores for the bioleaching experiments, the acclimatized fungus from the final stage of adaptation to spent catalyst was cultured as described in Because there are other biometabolites besides organic acids in the bioleaching medium, such as amino acids which involve in metal extraction, the purpose to perform the chemical leaching was to investigate the importance of the measured organic acids as agents in the bioleaching of W, Mo, Fe, Ni, and Al. Chemical leaching of the heavy metals was conducted in a solution containing commercial organic acids at the same concentrations as those produced by After the desired bioleaching time, the culture from each flask was filtered, and the filtrate was analyzed for organic acid content (i.e., citric, oxalic and gluconic acids). Analysis was performed using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) (Waters, model: ALLINACE 2695), with a variable wavelength detector (VWD) at 210 The filtrate was also analyzed to determine the concentration of various metal ions. Metal ions were analyzed using an ICP-AES (Varian, model: LIBERTY - RL). Multi-element standards (Merck) were used for the calibration. Additionally, the pH of the leached liquor was measured using a digital pH meter (Metrohm, model: 827 pH lab). The fungal biomass obtained from the filter paper was carefully transferred to a preweighed evaporating dish and dried at 80 Extraction and measurement of the accumulated and associated metals were performed as described by The scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to observe the morphology of the catalysts. The spent and bioleached catalysts were subjected to SEM examination. Samples were mounted with silver paste on aluminum stubs and then coated with 300–400 Elemental composition of spent hydro-cracking catalyst was determined using chemical digestion and XRF ( Crystalline phases in solid samples were identified by X-ray diffraction analysis ( This stage was necessary because there are some elements, such as Mn, Ti, Cr, Pb and Hg ( The adaptation was continued up to a pulp density of 5% (w/v). More than this concentration, no more fungal growth was observed. Accordingly, bioleaching experiments were conducted at pulp densities up to 5% (w/v). The production of organic acids, as the main agents in the bioleaching of metals, from sucrose involves a large number of enzymatic steps that occur in two different membrane-bound cellular compartments: the cytosol and the mitochondrion. Sucrose is substantially hydrolyzed to glucose and fructose through the action of invertase. Glucose is taken into the cell and converted to the three-carbon acid, pyruvate, via the glycolytic pathway in the cytosol. One molecule of pyruvate is decarboxylated through the formation of acetyl-CoA by the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, and another is carboxylated to oxaloacetate in the cytosol by pyruvate carboxylase. Oxaloacetate must be transported into the mitochondrion (via malate) and condensed with acetyl-CoA to form citrate ( Prior to the bioleaching experiments, pure cultures of adapted Within the first 2 The fungal bioleaching processes, mainly acidolysis and complexolysis, are mediated through the secondary metabolites produced by the fungus. Thus, it is important to investigate these metabolites to better understand the bioleaching mechanisms. The organic acids secreted by the fungus As shown in Pulp density was an important variable for the outcome of the various bioleaching methods investigated, especially one-step and spent medium bioleaching. The optimum pulp density for spent catalyst bioleaching occurred at 3% (w/v) for the one-step process and at 1% (w/v) for the spent medium leaching. In the two-step bioleaching method, the effect of pulp density on metal recovery was not significant. The optimal pulp density in the one-step bioleaching method was greater than reported in previous studies ( In the case of spent medium leaching, the decrease in leaching yield with an increase in pulp density was likely due to the constant metabolite concentration at all pulp densities ( The SEM photomicrograph of the spent ( As shown in Higher Al recovery was achieved in our previous study using At optimum pulp density, the recovery yields for one-step, two-step and spent medium bioleaching, respectively, are shown below. The yields for the one-step and spent medium bioleaching methods were quite similar but were very different from the two-step bioleaching method. In control experiments (data not shown) using fresh medium (sucrose medium), the recovery yield of Al and Ni was negligible at all pulp densities. Depending on the pulp density, the fresh medium effected an extraction of 8.0–13.4% W, 6.5–11.9% Mo, and 14.5–19.5% Fe. The behavior of Fe leaching was different from that of W and Mo. We observed that an increase in the pulp density (from 1 to 5% (w/v)) and a corresponding decrease in pH (from 4.82 to 4.20) led to a reduction of the extraction yield of Fe and an increase in the extraction yield of W and Mo. These results for Fe were consistent with those of   This work has shown that heavy metals from spent industrial catalyst may be mobilized by different methods of bioleaching with Although bioleaching technology offers many advantages over other conventional methods due to its relative simplicity, mild operating condition requirements, low energy input, reduced skilled labor requirements, and environmental friendliness, it requires a longer period of operation compared to other methods, such as chemical leaching. These results suggest that optimizing the bioleaching method using The authors thank the