A new green metallurgical process for chromite ore has been proposed and developed to solve the serious environmental problem in the traditional production process of chromate. In the new process, the oxidation of chromite ore is carried out in sub-molten potassium hydroxide at 300 °C. Compared with the traditional roasting process in a rotary kiln at 1200 °C, the oxidation and mass transfer are greatly intensified in the new process. Chemical conversion of chromium is above 99% and the recovery of chromium is raised by more than 20% while the reaction temperature is dropped by 900 °C. Thus the energy consumption is decreased. Furthermore, as no limestone or dolomite additives are required, the amount of chromium-containing residue is decreased from 2.5 tonnes to 0.5 tonnes with the production of 1.0 tonne of product in the new process. As all reactions and separating operations are performed in liquid media, pollution due to toxic dust is prevented.
                  With the change of reaction medium, the new process achieves higher resource and energy utilization efficiency. At the same time, the new process also changes the physical and chemical properties of other components co-existing in the chromite ore. The process provides the possibility for virtually complete utilization of chromite and zero emission of residue. Thus, the clean production of chromate can be realized.Chromate production from chromite ore is an important basic metallurgical process but is usually a source of severe pollution. The traditional chromate production process used in China presently consists of three procedures: roasting of chromite ore, water leaching, and multi-stage evaporation and crystallization. In the process of roasting, chromite is mixed with sodium carbonate and a large amount of limestone and dolomite additives, and then calcined at 1200 °C in a rotary kiln. The utilization of reagents and energy in the calcination process is quite low. In particular, a large amount of chromium-containing residue, chromite dusts and waste gases are discharged from chromate plants, which results in serious pollution problems all over the world. The key reaction of chromate production is the oxidation of chromium from Cr(III) to Cr(VI) by the oxygen in air. In the conventional process, limestone and dolomite additives are applied to avoid agglomeration of chromite particles and enhance the mass transfer of oxygen through thickening reaction products around the chromite particle. The amount of additives used in the process can be twice as much as that of the chromite ore, which causes a large amount of chromium-containing residue. Many new methods, such as acid leaching ( Prompted by urgent social needs, a green metallurgical process for chromite ore has been developed by the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences ( Compared with the gas–solid reactions of chromite with sodium carbonate and oxygen at high temperature (1200 °C), the reaction and separation in the new process can be controlled quantitatively and easily. This is because O The major chromium-bearing mineral can be ideally represented as FeO·Cr The relationship between the standard Gibbs free energy change (Δ Low-grade massive chromite specimens from Vietnam were used. The samples were crushed, ground and dry-sieved to different narrow size fractions. Experiments were carried out in a stainless steel reactor of cylindrical shape with a volume of 1.0 l. A mechanical agitator was used at a stirring speed of 800 rpm to keep the slurry suspended during the leaching experiment. A gas pipe with a distributor on one end was fixed inside the bottom of the reactor and compressed air was introduced through the pipe after pre-wetting. Generally the gas flow rate was set at 0.4 m The desired amount of reagent KOH was first placed in the reactor and mixed with a desired volume of distilled water. The heating furnace was then switched on and the system was heated. After most of the KOH was dissolved, the agitator was turned on to improve the mixing. When the temperature reached the preset value, the chromite ore was fed into the aqueous solution and the air compressor was started to provide the compressed air. The gas–liquid–solid reaction was thereby initialed. After a certain period of time when the chromium in the chromite ore was leached out thoroughly, the heating furnace and the air compressor were switched off and the stirring speed was reduced. A desired volume of diluent, generally fresh water or aqueous KOH solution of desired concentration, was introduced into the high-temperature liquid–solid system gradually through the cooling tube. As the K When the diluting process was over, the multiphase system was further mixed for a while and then kept still for several hours awaiting the sedimentation of the solid mixtures. As the density of the K The aqueous solution, together with the chromite ore leach residue therein, was then transferred and filtered. The filtrate (the leaching liquor) was kept for subsequent leaching reactions to make full use of the KOH. Three-stage countercurrent washing was carried out with dilute KOH aqueous solution or distilled water to wash the rudimentary chromium(VI) out of the filter cake. Finally, the K Solid samples, such as K The reaction kinetics of the liquid phase oxidation of chromite in the sub-molten salt medium was investigated to provide basic parameters for reactor design, scale up, and process application. When the ratio of KOH to ore is 4:1, the influence of reaction temperature on the conversion of chromium to chromate over the temperature range of 260–350 °C is shown in Because the chromite particles are dispersed evenly in the fluid medium of KOH, the resistance to oxygen mass transfer in the particle surface film is reduced. Mass transfer is greatly intensified and rates accelerated compared with oxidation roasting at 1200 °C. The conversion of chromite to chromate is more than 99%. Compared with the traditional process, the recovery of chromate is raised by more than 20%. Furthermore, the amount of chromium-containing residue is decreased from 2.5 tonnes per tonne of product in the traditional process to 500 kg per tonne of product in new process. The chromium content in the residue is decreased from 3% in the traditional process to < In developed countries, the general method of disposal of chromium-containing residue from roasting process is landfilling or stacking until hexavalent chromium is detoxified. Although there are a number of reports and patents for disposing chromium-containing residue ( The proper conditions of carbonate decomposition are as follows: the temperature is 30–40 °C, the CO Adding the ferrous sulfate into the carbonate decomposition process detoxifies hexavalent chromium in the basic magnesium carbonate, and the hexavalent chromium is no longer soluble and cannot be determined after detoxification. The process of carbonate leaching not only recovers magnesium but also allows use of the residue after the extraction of magnesium. This is fine iron oxide and an ideal raw material for the cement industry. Thus, the comprehensive utilization of valuable elements in chromite ore and the zero emission of chromium-containing toxic waste can be achieved successfully in this green metallurgical process. The green metallurgical process of chromium combines environmental and economic benefits, comprehensive utilization of resources, inner recycle of reactants, and zero emission. If realized, the technology will play an important role in the sustainable development of the chromate industry. Based on experimental investigations, as well as theoretical analyses, the principal flow sheet of the green metallurgical process for chromite ore is shown in Based on the new technology, a demonstration project with an annual production capacity of 10,000 tonnes has been set up in Henan Province, P. R. China. The technology has exhibited promising prospects for the industrial production of chromium compounds. The main results of experiments and small-scale pilot plant tests are given in The overall reaction equation is as follows: Since this green chemical process not only achieves a high extraction yield of chromium but also enables the residues to be treated and the accompanying elements to be utilized, the technology will improve the overall value of chromite ore resources and eliminate waste emission. Experimental results and small-scale pilot plant tests demonstrate the process to be economically favorable and environmentally significant. A novel and innovative green metallurgical process for chromate production has been developed. The fundamental thermodynamic and kinetic reactions of chromite ore oxidation in sub-molten potassium hydroxide are analyzed. The free energy change of sub-molten KOH phase oxidation of chromite is exothermic and superior to that of the traditional roasting process. The reaction kinetics follows a shrinking core model and is controlled by a chemical reaction at the surface with an activation energy of 52.5 kJ/mol. The main exothermic reaction is beneficial to lowering the overall energy consumption. Pilot plant tests demonstrate that the chromate yield is 99%. The amount of discharged chromium-containing residue is only 20% of that in the traditional process. A novel method of treating this residue with carbon dioxide is proposed that enables magnesium to be leached and an iron oxide residue to be used as a raw material in the cement industry, which leads to the zero emission of toxic residue. The green metallurgical process for chromite ores provides a good model for the possible comprehensive utilization of a natural resource and elimination of pollution by modifying the feed reactions. Financial supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 50234040 and 20306031) National 863 Project of China (Grant No. 2005AA647010) and the Major Program Project of the Knowledge. Innovation Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. KCCX1-SW-22) are gratefully acknowledged.