Radioactivity measurements have been conducted in nine underground phosphate mines in the Egyptian Eastern Desert in order to estimate the occupational radiation exposure of mine workers in those mining sites. Measurements were carried out of airborne radon (
                        222
                        Rn
                     ) and its short-lived decay products (progeny) and thoron (
                        220
                        Rn
                     ) progeny, as well as γ-radiation from mine walls, ceilings and floors. Comparison of experimental data and theoretical predictions showed partial agreement between these two sets of data. This result is partly attributed to the complex layout of these mines which causes undesirable ventilation conditions, such as recirculation airflow patterns which could not be adequately identified or quantified. The radiation data obtained were used to estimate the Maximum Annual Dose (MAD), and other important occupational radiation exposure variables. These calculations indicate that in eight out of the nine mines surveyed, the MAD exceeded (by a factor of up to 7) the maximum recommended level by ICRP-60. A number of suggestions are made in order to reduce the MAD in the affected mines.The elements Uranium (U) and Thorium (Th) are widely distributed in the lithosphere. Two isotopes of these elements, namely, Phosphorus (P) does not occur free in nature but its compounds are widely distributed, mainly as phosphates, and are found in many rocks and minerals. Phosphorus ranks 11th in abundance in the lithosphere,where the average content is about 0.12%. There are over 150 species of phosphate minerals of which the most common are apatite, phosphorite, wavellite and vivianite. Organic phosphate compounds are present in the structural units of every animal cell. Inorganic phosphate is associated with calcium (Ca) in bone and teeth. Phosphates play a fundamental role in life processes as indicated by their occurrence in large biomolecular structures such as RNA, DNA and ATP. Large deposits of rock phosphate, and other phosphorous compounds, are found in many geographical localities. These deposits are of great economic value for the manufacture of: agricultural fertilizers (superphosphates), defloculants of colloidal particles, synthetic detergents, pharmaceutical compounds such as toothpaste, plasticizers that have flame proofing properties, gasoline and oil additives, chemical compounds used for the formation of soluble complexes, building materials that may contain phosphate (e.g., phosphogypsum). The manufacture and use of phosphates can lead to the contamination of agricultural land during cultivation, as well as contamination of the air and water supplies. This contamination is compounded by the fact that natural U can substitute for Ca in the phosphate rock structure and over long periods, i.e., geological time, accumulate in phosphate reserves. Thus, U is present not only in fertilizers manufactured from phosphate rock but also in chemical derivatives used for other industrial, building and pharmaceutical purposes. Hence, phosphates have a potential radiological health concern in addition to their chemical toxicity. Typical concentrations of U in phosphate rock range between 30 and 260 The radioactivity content of phosphate ore (extracted from Egyptian phosphate mines), as well as phosphatic fertilizer (i.e., superphosphate) and the by-product phosphogypsum in an Egyptian phosphate plant gave the following respective values ( Other fertilizer analyses show values for the This paper deals with radioactivity measurements conducted in several underground phosphate mines in the Egyptian desert and the estimation of occupational exposure to radiation of workers in these mines. Preliminary work has been conducted by Radioactivity measurements ( The following measurements were conducted at the phosphate mines:    Total γ-ray exposure rates from the mine walls, roofs and floors. It should be noted that in the above, PAEC stands for Potential Alpha Energy Concentration. The symbols Rn and Tn are used to denote, respectively, Radon-222 concentration, [ Mine measurements were conducted along the length of the tunnels and at equally spaced locations whenever practically possible. Five air samples of Temperature ( Experimental results are shown in   The experimental values for the variables   “Adverse” underground conditions, e.g., poor ventilation, recirculation, and presumably low submicron aerosol concentration, and hence, significant selective plate-out of Non-optimized Although of practical and theoretical interest, the variables When the experimental  Underground radiation exposures to which the phosphate miners were subjected are shown in  Since the MAD (total) limit applied to occupational workers in Egypt is set at 20 The experimental data presented in this paper are of practical interest from both the mining engineering and the occupational health and safety standpoints. Comparison of experimental data and theoretical expectations has only met with partial success. The reasons for this are attributed to the lack of reliable and vital engineering information, e.g., ventilation characteristics regarding the underground phosphate mines investigated, as well as the complex layout of these mines. The latter is presumed to be responsible for recirculation and other undesirable airflow conditions for which some or no information is available. The most relevant data in the context of this paper are, however, for personal dose and Maximum Annual Effective Dose (MAD). The results shown in several tables indicate that the MAD for phosphate mine workers in the area under consideration was exceeded in 8 out of the 9 phosphate mines surveyed (up to a factor of 7 in two cases). This clearly indicates the urgent need for improving underground conditions in order to reduce airborne radioactivity concentrations to presently accepted levels recommended by improvement of the underground ventilation characteristics, e.g., increase of airflow rate; job rotation; and reduction of the worker's underground exposure time. What remedial measure or combination of remedial measures is ultimately implemented depends a great deal on sound health and safety practices, as well as economical considerations. It is also suggested that periodic surveys be conducted to ensure compliance with standard health and safety regulations and recommendations. The total Maximum Annual Dose, MAD(total), is made up of three components corresponding to the contribution arising from The value of The first value for CF has been taken from The Average Dose Rate (ADR) is given by the expression: In our case, 〈PAEC〉 is taken as the value obtained for this quantity averaged over all the measurements carriedout at any given mine. However, this is not correct as the true 〈PAEC〉 (Rn, Tn) should be calculated according to: