Holes, including their shape and distribution, significantly affect the performance in rocks. In this paper, a numerical investigation, based on a FEM-CZM method, was developed to explore the shear behavior of rock-like materials containing fissure-holes. The laboratory uniaxial compression test was initially performed, and a corresponding numerical model was established by inserting zero-thickness cohesive elements into finite elements globally, the mechanical parameters were acquired by parameter trial and error tests. Subsequently, numerical direct shear tests were conducted under the constant normal stress level. Finally, the mechanical properties, shear deformation, and cracking behaviors were respectively discussed. The results show that for rock-like materials containing fissure-holes, the shearing process can be divided into four typical stages from the perspective of the cohesive elements. In addition, the mechanical characteristics (i.e., peak shear strength, residual shear strength, and crack initiation stress), shear deformation, and cracking behaviors (i.e., crack initiation, propagation, and coalescence), as well as the coalescence mechanism strongly depend on the shape, ligament angle, and the combination of fissure-holes. Furthermore, based on the damaged cohesive elements, the rock bridge coalescence modes between two fissure-holes were identified as “DT” (dominated by tensile damage), “T” (tensile damage), and “S + T” (shear and tensile damage), respectively.Rocks are naturally embedded with a variety of defects ( Fractured rock materials primarily contain two groups of flaws, i.e., crack-like flaws and hole-like flaws ( The finite element method (FEM) has been extensively utilized to explore the mechanical and cracking behaviors of fractured rock masses ( Note that, for rocks or rock-like materials containing hole-like flaws, most researches concentrated on the mechanical and cracking behaviors under uniaxial compression, whereas information under shearing is rather limited. However, failure caused by the shearing effect can also commonly occur in slopes (see The traction-separation model available in finite element program Abaqus assumes an initially linear elastic behavior, followed by the initiation and evolution of damage ( In the damage evolution stage, which can be shown in To describe the damage evolution of a crack under a combination of normal and shear deformation on the crack surface, it is necessary and valuable to introduce an effective displacement, as expressed below: In addition, the damage variable The normal stress components of the traction-separation model change as follows due to the damage accumulation: Similarly, the tensile and shear stiffness can be described as: In this paper, the quadratic normal stress criterion was applied to describe the beginning of the stiffness degradation. As a quadratic interaction function involving the normal stress ratios reaches a value of one, the damage initiates. The criterion can be represented as: To accurately reveal the cracking behaviors of rock fracture without a pre-set crack path, cohesive elements should be inserted into the initial finite mesh globally. Note that the cohesive elements should be set to zero-thickness to ensure the insertion of cohesive elements cannot change the original size of the model. The inserting process of cohesive elements can be presented in To obtain the mechanical parameters of the rock-like material, the standard cylindrical specimen with dimensions of 100 mm length and 50 mm diameter was adopted to conduct the uniaxial compression test ( A comparison of the experimental and numerical results in the uniaxial compression test can be presented in In this paper, both the failure mode and the mechanical properties of the numerical simulation are highly consistent with the experimental. In addition, the fracture process of the specimen in the numerical model can also well explain the failure features. Therefore, the mechanical parameters acquired in the numerical can be utilized to explore the shear behavior of rock-like materials, and the numerical parameters are listed in A conceptual model for rock-like materials containing fissure-holes is presented in The shearing process of rock-like materials containing fissure-holes of cases AI-AIII can be illustrated in  The relation of shear stress and shear displacement under different loading conditions can be shown in The vertical deformation of the specimen during the direct shear process can reflect its dilatancy characteristics. The distribution of vertical displacement evolves with shear displacement is shown in  In this section, the stress distribution along the shear direction and the fracture process patterns of cases AI-AIII are gathered and presented in To explore the crack coalescence mechanism, it is necessary to identify the type of generated cracks according to the damaged cohesive elements. The MMIXDME, which represents the proportion of fracture modes during damage evolution, was utilized to determine the damage type of cohesive elements. Specifically, when the value of MMIXDME is in the range of 0 to 0.5, the cohesive elements are dominated by tensile damage, resulting in tensile cracks, while controlled by shear damage (shear cracks) when the value is in the range of 0.5 to 1. In addition, when the value is equal to −1, the cohesive elements are not damaged at this time. Here, taking case AIII as an example, the failure mode based on the cohesive elements can be illustrated in  The stress distribution along the shear direction and the fracture process patterns of specimen containing fissures-elliptical holes with different ligament angles (i.e., 0°, 90°) are displayed as To determine the coalescence mechanism of rock-like materials containing fissure-elliptical holes with different ligament angles, the damaged types of coalescence cracks were gathered according to the cohesive elements, as shown in The stress distribution along the shear direction and the fracture process patterns of the specimen containing different combinations of fissures-holes are displayed in The damaged types of coalescence cracks are identified according to the cohesive elements, as shown in In general, for case CI, the overall rock bridge coalescence cracks are dominated by shear cracks, but with local tensile cracks between the two fissure-holes. Regarding case CII, the cohesive elements along the coalescence cracks are dominated by tensile damage, but with local shear damage in the left rock bridge. Concerning case CIII, the coalescence cracks are dominated by shear cracks at the two sides of rock bridges, while tensile cracks for the rock bridge between the two fissure-holes. Therefore, it is apparent that the fracture mechanism strongly depends on the distribution and shape of the holes. In this section, the rock bridge coalescence cracks between two fissure-holes are concluded, which can be listed in A comprehensive investigation on the shear behavior of rock-like materials containing fissure-holes was performed with the FEM-CZM method. In the numerical technique, all the initial finite meshes were discretized using zero-thickness cohesive elements globally, which can help to describe the properties of the combination of continuum and non-continuum. Based on this method, the main conclusions can be drawn as follows: Evolution properties of the shearing process for rock-like materials containing fissure-holes were investigated and first reported from the perspective of the cohesive elements. Generally, the shearing process can be divided into four typical stages, respectively elastic strengthening stage, crack strengthening stage, plastic softening, and residual strength stage. Note that the crack initiation is at the beginning of the crack strengthening stage. In addition, the shear rate affects the shearing process apparently, i.e., the greater the shear rate is, the shorter the plastic soften stage is, and the larger the brittleness is. However, the applied normal stress hardly affects the shearing process. The shape and the ligament angle of fissure-holes significantly affect the mechanical properties (i.e., peak shear strength, residual shear strength, and crack initiation stress). The rock-like materials containing fissure-elliptical holes with the ligament angles of 0° has the smallest shear strength. Thus, that should be the focus of reinforcement. In addition, the crack initiation stress in the fissure-square holes is the smallest, which indicates that cracks are more prone to occur than that of other shapes. Therefore, that should be an early concern in fracture engineering. The shear dilatancy of rock-like materials containing fissure-holes is influenced by the shape and the ligament angle of fissure-holes as well as loading conditions obviously. The maximum shear dilatancy occurred when the specimen contains fissure-elliptical holes with the ligament angle of 90°. In addition, the larger the shear rate is, the greater the maximum shear dilatancy is, the less the applied normal stress is, the larger the maximum shear dilatancy is. Cracking behaviors, including their initiation, propagation, and coalescence, were analyzed detailed and found that they strongly depend on the shapes, ligament angles as well as the combinations of fissure-holes significantly. In addition, the type of each crack was precisely obtained with the damaged cohesive elements. Furthermore, three types of rock bridge coalescence modes between two fissure-holes can be identified from the point of the failure patterns, namely “DT”, “T”, and “S + T”.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was funded by