Introduction
                  Reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) has become a common treatment in displaced proximal humeral fracture (PHF) in elderly patients due to inconstant results with osteosynthesis or hemiarthroplasty. RSA allows a good anterior elevation but rotational results are more random and depend on tuberosity healing.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Use of an offset modular system (OMS) on the prothesis improve tuberosity healing and functional results.
               
                  Material and methods
                  This retrospective cohort analysed radiological and clinical outcomes at least one year after the use of RSA Humelock II Reversed (Fx Solutions) after a displaced PHF Neer 3 or 4 in patients over 70 years. The first criterion was tuberosity healing with or without the use of the OMS device on radiographs. The second criterion was a clinical analysis of active range of motion (ROM), anterior elevation (AAE), external and internal rotations (ER, IR), Constant, DASH, SSV, VAS scores according to tuberosity healing. We also analysed radiological and clinical complications.
               
                  Results
                  We analysed from November 2013 to May 2018 thirty-four RSA. Mean age was 78±5,7 years, mean follow up was 18±7,2 months and the mean tuberosity healing rate was 79%. Mean ROM were: 117±24 (AAE), 18̊±18 (ER) and L2 (IR). On the first analysis, healing tuberosity with cage was present on 24 (92%) patients versus 3 (37,5%) without (p
                     <0,005). The second analysis showed a non-significant improvement on ER, IR, Constant, DASH and SSV. Complications found were three removal of prothesis after infection, one axillary nerve lesion, one ulnar paraesthesia and one humeral loosening.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The use of the OMS cage allows a better consolidation of tuberosities in a significant way but no significant clinical effects was highlighted due to a small patient number in the study.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  level III, retrospective cohort.Reverse shoulder arthroplasty (RSA) has become the reference for the treatment of displaced proximal humeral fractures (PHF) Neer 3 and 4 in the elderly patient RSA often allows good constant results and anterior elevation even with no rotator cuff or tuberosity osteolysis The hypothesis was that the use of a cage that we can fix upon prothesis to use bone graft will lead to better tuberosity healing, so better functional result. We performed a radiological study with the first judgement criterion evaluating tuberosity healing and a clinical study evaluating ROM and clinical scores. The study was a retrospective cohort in two centres. All the patients were operated for an acute displaced PHF Neer 3 or 4 with RSA Humelock II Reversed™ (Fx Solution, Viriat, France: RSA Humelock II Reversed™) with or without the use of a cage on the metaphysis part of the prosthesis ( We excluded patients with impossible clinical evaluation (dementia or death before 1 year of follow up); with tuberosity resection during the surgical procedure, with recovery surgery after failed ORIF or orthopaedic treatment or failed HAP. Primary judgment criterion was radiological outcomes with tuberosity healing with or without the use of the cage. A secondary judgment criterion was clinical outcomes with functional results according to tuberosity healing (ROM, Constant score, DASH, SSV, VAS). We also noticed radiographical and clinical. The surgery was realised in beach chair position under general anaesthesia and interscalene block. All surgeons use the Humelock Reversed II prosthesis ( For postoperative care we used a simple sling for 6 weeks. Used of arm for daily movement, passive ROM and pendulum exercises was authorised immediately after surgery. Active ROM was possible after 6 weeks. We reviewed patients 1, 3, 6, 12 months and yearly after surgery. We evaluated passive and active ROM: anterior elevation (AAE), external and internal rotation (ER, IR) and abduction. Clinical scores were calculated at 1 year and yearly: Constant and adjusted Constant, Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score (DASH), VAS (Visual Analog Scale) and SSV. Clinicals complications were researched, especially nerves injuries with deltoid amyotrophy, paraesthesia and also hematoma, infection, luxation or fracture ( At each consultation we analysed radiographs on anteroposterior and lateral views. On the preoperative radiographs we used the Neer classification and we search a luxation of the fractured humeral head We obtained the agreement of all the patients to realise the study. For the statistical analyses we used Excel software version 2019. We realised a Fischer non-parametric test for qualitative variables and a bilateral Student test for quantitative variables. The significant level was set at 0,05. We reviewed patients operated between November 2013 and May 2018 ( The two groups with and without OMS device was comparable on the following parameters: age, sex, comorbidities (smokers, cardiovascular pathologies, diabetic, BMI, ASA score, Parker score), Neer score. Primary tuberosity reduction seems to be better with the use of the OMS device. Healing tuberosity with cage occurred on 24 (92%) patients versus 3 (37,5%) without ( When we analysed functional outcomes according to tuberosity healing, we observed a trend to improve rotational ROM and clinical scores. ROM were with tuberosity healing respectively 116̊, 19̊, L2 on AAE, ER and IR versus 119̊, 14̊, L4 with osteolysis. On the same way, clinical score trended to be improved with tuberosity healing with non-significative results. Results are summarized in Finally, we demonstrated that the use of the OMS device improved healing tuberosities around the prothesis. This is the first study to specifically analyse the tuberosity healing using an OMS device with bone graft and in the same way, tuberosity offset. Our study didn’t find significant improvement on ROM and clinical scores with tuberosities healing even if Boileau and Gallinet has already proved it Results of clinical outcomes in our study are very close with results of Ohl and Nerot, in the SOFCOT symposium of 2016, who find ROM of 115̊ in anterior elevation, 17̊ in external rotation and internal rotation around S1. On the same way clinical scores are closed with a Constant score at 57 and SSV at 70% in the symposium. In our studies, we have few complications as inferior scapular notching. This can be explained because of the short delay of review of our patients. Cazeneuve Humeral loosening is a rare complication We also think that the use of the OMS device allows increase the humeral offset by avoiding a medial consolidation of the tuberosities. This leads to a better tension on the infraspinatus and subscapularis tendon, especially because we can use three different size of OMS device to adjust tuberosity lateralisation. In addition, the use of lateralized humeral stem has been shown to increase the stability in cuff tear arthropathy indications with a low dislocation rate, even if the subscapularis was not repaired Mean rate of greater tuberosity healing is 79% in our study and is about 70% for Jain in his metanalysis Finally, this implant answers to the criteria described by Boileau with the main advantage of avoiding the healing of tuberosity in a medial position due to collapse of the graft following an excess of pressure on this one. The OMS device also increases the stability of the graft and therefore a better consolidation. Finally, we observed in our studies a significant improvement tuberosity healing with the use of the OMS device and bone graft. Clinically, external and internal rotations are improved as well as Constant, DASH and SSV scores but this is non-significant. We demonstrate that the use of an implant with a non-bulky metaphysis for grafting, but the graft has to be fixed on the prosthesis with a cage or other system because it increases stability of the graft and allow healing tuberosities. This study should be continued with a larger number of patients and a longer follow-up in order to evaluate clinical outcomes. E.B. Consultant for Fx Solutions. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. No financing was received for the study. T Fortané author. E Beaudouin J Tonetti: surgeons reviewer. P Giraudo G Lateur G Kerschbaumer M Boudhissa: surgeons. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 