The crystallization behaviour of fly ash based glass samples annealed at 600°C for 2 and 10 h was investigated by DTA, XRD and SEM. On the basis of DTA, nucleation experiments of two glass samples were carried out at 680 and 687°C for 5 h and crystallization experiments were performed at 924 and 892°C for 20 min. The Avrami constant for both glass samples was calculated as 4, which indicates bulk crystallization, predicted by the Ozawa equation. Using the modified Kissinger equation, activation energies of crystal growth were determined as 318 and 312 kJ/mol for samples annealed at 2 and 10 h, respectively. Single peak analysis technique proved that the activation energy is independent of DTA heating rate. SEM observations indicated that the produced glass–ceramic samples have fine grained microstructure. The crystallized phase was identified as diopside [Ca(Mg,Al)(Si,Al)2O6] by X-ray diffraction analysis. The results of Vickers microhardness tests showed that the hardness values of the produced glass–ceramic samples decreased with the increase in holding time at the annealing temperature.Fly ash is a waste material produced from coal burning thermal power plants. Since it is in dry form and produced in large quantities, it is one of the major source for environmental pollution. In recent years, many research and development investigations have been conducted in its utilization as a starting material for glass–ceramic production. Glass–ceramics are polycrystalline solids produced by controlled crystallization of glasses. Differential thermal analysis (DTA) is widely used in investigating the crystallization kinetics of glasses and glass-ceramics. The aim of the present work is to investigate the effect of different holding times during annealing temperature on the crystallization behaviour of fly ash based glasses and to determine some kinetic parameters that describe the crystallization process by DTA. The detailed procedure of the glass production from fly ash which consists of chemically following oxides (in wt.%); 42.82% SiO Differential thermal analysis (DTA) scans of annealed glass specimens were carried out in a Rigaku Thermoflex Thermal Analyzer. After crushing annealed glasses to the size of about 1 mm, non-isothermal experiments were performed by heating 30 mg glass samples in a Pt-crucible and using Al Nucleation and crystallization experiments were carried out on the basis of DTA scan results. The peak temperatures ( The characterization of the produced glass–ceramic samples was carried out using both electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction techniques. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) investigations were conducted in a Jeol™ Model JSM-T330 operated at 25 kV and linked with an energy dispersive (EDS) attachment. For the SEM investigations, optical mount specimens were prepared using standard metallographic techniques followed by chemical etching them in a HF solution (5%) for 1.5 min. The etched glass–ceramic samples were coated with a thin layer of gold. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) investigations were carried out in a Philips™ Model PW3710 using Cu Vickers microhardness measurements of heat treated glass–ceramic samples were made with a LL Model Tukon Tester. Specimens were prepared using conventional metallographic techniques and a load of 500 g were used to indent their surfaces. In order to obtain reliable statistical data, at least 15 indentations were made on each sample. DTA experiments were carried out on annealed glass samples to investigate the crystallization behaviour of the glasses. The variation of the crystallization peaks with different DTA heating rates can be used to estimate the activation energy for crystallization and to determine the crystallization mechanism. The activation energy for the crystallization of the glass samples can be determined by using the modified Kissinger method as described by Matusiata et al. Where The value of the Avrami constant, Activation energy for any of the glass sample can also be determined from a single DTA peak using the following equation: To determine the morphology of the microstructure, SEM investigations were applied on the produced glass–ceramic samples. The crystalline phase was identified by XRD analysis. The XRD scans revealed that the main crystalline phase is diopside-alumina [Ca(Mg, Al)(Si, Al) As seen in Vickers microhardness measurements taken from the glass–ceramics annealed at 600°C for 2 and 10 h yielded the values of 907 and 729 kg/mm From the experimental results the following conclusions can be drawn. DTA results showed that the crystallization temperature varied from 863 to 950°C with the increase in the heating rate. The crystallization behaviour of glass–ceramic samples has been investigated under non-isothermal conditions. Using the Ozawa equation, the Avrami constant ( XRD results revealed that the glass–ceramic samples with different heating conditions have the same crystalline phase determined as the diopside-alumina [Ca(Mg, Al)(Si, Al) SEM investigations revealed that tiny crystallites ranging in size between 0.25 and 0.5 μm were uniformly dispersed in the microstructure for both samples. Similar crystalline morphology and sizes were also observed in the cross-sectional microstructures as a result of bulk crystallization in both samples. The microhardness values of the produced glass–ceramics decrease with increase in the holding time at the annealing temperature.