Objective
                  The recently developed bioactive glass PC-XG3, which is suitable to coat zirconia implant surfaces with high adhesion strength may reduce the time of osseointegration and the marginal bone loss following implantation. The glass composition has been previously evaluated for cytotoxicity on fibroblast cells, and will now be used to evaluate the cell behavior of osteoblast cells.
               
                  Methods
                  Three different surface morphologies were created with PC-XG3 on zirconia discs. A clinically tested zirconia implant surface as well as polished and machined zirconia served as a reference. Cell viability after 24 h, cell spreading after 30 min and 24 h and the respective morphology of human osteoblasts using scanning electron microscopy were evaluated. Additionally, the corrosive process of PC-XG3 in cell culture medium up to 7 d was measured.
               
                  Results
                  Initial cell behavior of human osteoblasts was not accelerated by the PC-XG3 surface when compared to zirconia. Additionally, it was found that a decreased surface roughness promoted initial cell spreading. Storage in cell culture medium resulted in the accumulation of C and N on the bioglass surface while Mg, Si, K and Ca were decreased and crack formation was observed.
               
                  Significance
                  Since initial spreading quality to a biomaterial is a crucial factor that will determine the subsequent cell function, proliferation, differentiation, and viability it can be assumed that a coating of zirconia implants with this bioactive glass will unlikely reduce osseointegration time.Dental implants made of zirconia can be considered an esthetic and biocompatible alternative to the well-established titanium implants [ The production of a cer.face 14 zirconia implant surface is very time consuming, expensive and etching with 40 % hydrofluoric acid a potential health risk to the technical operator. The etching procedure is, however, required to create a micro-structured surface to increase the implants torque and achieve its osseointegration. Balmer et al. revealed that a certain immediate loading of zirconia implants is possible without crestal bone loss [ To address the mentioned requirements and potentially slow down the marginal bone loss following implantation coatings made of bioactive glasses can be applied onto the implant surfaces [ Bioactive glasses are able to create a direct chemical bond to bone over the formation of hydroxyl carbonated apatite on its surface [ Bioglass 45S5 invented in the late 1960s by Hench LL, is still considered as the gold standard of bioactive materials [ The objective of the present study was therefore to evaluate osteoblast behavior on bioactive glass PC-XG3 and to further characterize its corrosion. Three differently micro-structured glass coatings were created and compared to polished and machined zirconia as well as the clinically tested cer.face 14 implant surface. Hypothesis were that (1) cell viability of human osteoblasts will be increased on PC-XG3 coated surfaces compared to zirconia surfaces and (2) cell spreading will be accelerated on PC-XG3 surfaces compared to zirconia surfaces. Six different surface morphology options for a zirconia implant surface were compared in the present study ( After drying for 15 min at room temperature (RT), all coated specimens of G1, G2, and G3 were sintered at 830 °C for 100 min (Austromat 3001). For G2 and G3 a second layer of bioglass was applied on the densely sintered first coating and fired at 760 °C for 10 min (G2) or 750 °C for 25 min (G3) respectively to create a microstructure. The amorphous bioglass coatings had a thickness of 20–40 μm after sintering. The thickness was checked with light microscopy (AXIO Imager M2m, Zeiss, Wetzlar) after coating as well as after sintering by breaking one specimen per batch in half using a universal testing machine (Z020, Zwick/Roell, Ulm Germany) with a cross-head speed of 50 mm/s. All specimens were finally cleaned in an ultrasonic bath with ethanol 70 % for 5 min, followed by distilled water for 5 min, sterilized at 200 °C for 2 h (T 5028, Heraeus, Hanau, Germany) and then stored in sterile 24-well-plates. Storage time after manufacturing of specimens until measurements was at least 2 weeks. The surface topography of the specimens was visualized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (ESEM XL30, Philips, Eindhoven, the Netherlands). Specimens were gold-sputtered with a layer of 20 nm and images captured at 1000× from 3 angles deviating by 10° to additionally visualize 3D topography (Alicona MeX, Alicona Imaging v 6.1). Based on the 3D SEM images, roughness parameters arithmetical mean height (Sa) and maximum height (Sz) was calculated (filter tc λc 20.0 μm; area 7000 μm). To verify 3D data also 2D roughness parameters arithmetical mean height (Ra) and maximum height of profile (Rz) were measured with a profilometer (T1000/TKK50, Hommelwerke, Schwenningen, Germany). For each group 6 specimens were analyzed with 5 contact measurements over a distance of 4.8 mm (T1E, tip 5 μm 90°, 1.6 mN, Hommel-Etamic/Jenoptik, Jena, Germany). Surface wetting was measured using contact angle of water (WCA) with a drop-shape-analyzer (DSA100, Krüss, Hamburg, Germany). Five sessile drops of 0.5 μl were measured on 6 specimens per group. To evaluate the corrosion of the glass-coated surfaces, an energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) (Genesis, EDAX, Mahwah, NJ, USA/XL30 FEG ESEM, Philips Electron Optics, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) was conducted on G1–G3 at 20 kV after manufacturing and after storage in complete cell culture medium (see below, DMEM + 10%FCS) of 37 °C for 30 min, 24 h, 3 d and 7 d, respectively. Additionally, surfaces were observed for crack development using SEM. To evaluate the corrosion depth of the glass coating on the zirconia surfaces, specimens of G1–G3 were broken in half at a cross-head speed of 50 mm/min using a universal testing machine (Z020, Zwick/Roell, Ulm, Germany). Cell behavior of human osteoblast-like cells (MG-63) was tested on all surfaces. MG-63 cells (American Type Culture Collection ATCC, CRL1427) were cultivated in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium (DMEM; gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) with 10 % fetal calf serum (FCS, Biochrom FCS superior, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) and 1% antibiotic (gentamicin, ratiopharm, Ulm, Germany). Specimen surfaces were seeded with 5 × 10 Mitochondrial dehydrogenase activity was measured by MTT assay (3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) to investigate cell viability of cells growing on specimens. After incubation of MG-63 cells for 24 h on the different surfaces to evaluate the initial cell reaction to the bioglass, specimens were transferred to a new well-plate and MTS solution (CellTiter 96 ONE-Solution Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega, Madison, USA) with culture medium was added (1:5) to each specimen. A blank group containing a specimen with culture medium without cells and a control group with cells growing on well bottom were additionally tested. After 80 min, supernatants were transferred to a 96-well plate (for each specimen 3 × 80 μl were analyzed). The optical density (OD) was recorded at 490 nm with a micro-plate reader (Anthos, Mikrosysteme, Krefeld, Germany). Relative cell viability was calculated using the following equation: Cell spreading was assessed on all surfaces after 30 min and 24 h, respectively. Due to the opaque material properties of the zirconia specimens, osteoblasts were labelled using red fluorescent dye (PKH-26, Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) prior to seeding. After 30 min or 24 h, cells were rinsed twice with PBS (dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline, Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, Germany) fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min at RT, rinsed again with PBS and embedded with mounting medium (Fluoroshield with DAPI, Sigma-Aldrich) and a cover slip. Cells were examined with a water immersion objective (C Apochromat 40×, Carl Zeiss, 1.20 W Korr M27) at a wavelength of 546 nm by a confocal laser scanning microscope (LSM780, Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). Mean spreading area in μm Cell morphology after 30 min and 24 h was visualized using SEM (FEI Nova NanoSEM230, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells on the specimens were rinsed with PBS after the respective time intervals, fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde (Merck KGaA) for 15 min at RT, rinsed with PBS, dehydrated with ethanol (30%, 50%, 70%, 90%, abs.), dried in a desiccator with silica gel and gold-sputtered. Critical point drying was not performed to prevent bioglass surfaces from further corrosion. Data of surface roughness, contact angle, cell viability and cell spreading were analyzed separately for normal distribution. With data of roughness parameter Rz a logarithmic transformation was performed due to variations in standard deviations. One-way ANOVA was then applied followed by post-hoc Fisher LSD to test for differences between the substrates (p < 0.05) (StatPlus Pro, v6.1.25). The surface morphologies of zirconia Zp, Zm and Z14 as well as glass-coated G1–G3 specimens are displayed in 2D and 3D roughness values of the specimens are given in Contact angle of water on the specimens was generally lower on bioglass coated specimens than on zirconia ( EDX analysis revealed a change in elements present on the glass surfaces after storage in cell culture medium up to 7 d ( The relative cell viability after 24 h was significantly higher for Zp than for all other specimens (p < 0.001) ( The objective of the present study was to evaluate osteoblast behavior on bioactive glass PC-XG3 and to further characterize its corrosion. The first hypothesis that cell viability of human osteoblasts will be increased on PC-XG3 coated surfaces compared to zirconia was rejected because cell viability was similar on glass surfaces as on Zm and Z14 and even significantly lower than on Zp. The second hypothesis that cell spreading will be accelerated on PC-XG3 surfaces compared to zirconia surfaces was also rejected. Analysis of cell spreading area and morphology revealed that cell spreading after 30 min was further enhanced on zirconia than on glass surfaces. The specimens tested in the present study presented roughness parameters classified as smooth (Zp, Zm) to moderately rough (Z14, G1) to rough surfaces (G2, G3) as previously defined [ Initial water contact angles >90° of implant surfaces are considered unfavorable for the initial biological response in blood contact [ In a previous study where the bioglasses PC-XG3 and 45S5 were stored in SBF solution, a Si-rich layer of 20 μm covered by a CaP-rich layer of about 10 μm was formed on the surfaces after 14 d [ The formation of cracks and delamination of the glass surfaces are a typical corrosion process of bioglass as shown in the literature [ Cell behavior on the specimens was assessed using the human osteoblast-like cell line MG-63 that is reported to display similar cellular reactions regarding morphological behavior, adhesion and signaling properties on biomaterials as primary human osteoblasts [ Initial cell spreading after 30 min was clearly promoted on zirconia compared to glass-coated specimens. This might be due to the degenerative process of bioglass making it difficult for cells to adhere on the instable substrate. Additionally, an increased roughness of the specimens resulted in a lower initial cell spreading area. It has been speculated that ridges and valleys on rough surface may exert stronger constraints on cells than smooth surfaces which therefore only require weak restraints; thus the cells on the smooth surface try to spread widely to stabilize themselves on the substrate [ Further studies are required to assess the contribution of submicrometer and micrometer surface structure levels on zirconia to create an implant surface with ideal biological and osseointegration capabilities. Analysis of cell viability, cell spreading area, and morphology revealed that initial cell behavior of human osteoblasts is not accelerated by the bioglass-coated surface PC-XG3 when compared to zirconia. Since initial spreading quality to a biomaterial is a crucial factor that will determine the subsequent cell function, proliferation, differentiation, and viability it can be concluded that a coating of zirconia implants with this bioactive glass will unlikely enhance the osseointegration behavior in vivo. This work was in part supported by the The authors are grateful to the team at the Department of Cell Biology, Rostock for the laboratory assistance.