Lactic acid production by batch-fed fermentation of deproteinized whey, using immobilized cells of Lactobacillus pentosus-4023 in a spirally wound fibrous-sheet packed-column reactor, has been investigated. This fermentation process has been studied to produce low-cost lactic acid ‘in situ’ and to investigate its direct use for the demineralization of crayfish chitinous fraction (exoskeleton). Chitin obtained by this procedure was chemically and spectrometrically (FT-IR and 13C-NMR) characterized.The recent interest in chitin and chitosan is reflected at an increasing number of meetings in Europe, Asia and America, and of papers published on this topic Traditional methods for the commercial preparation of chitin from crustacean shell (exoskeleton) involve alternate hydrochloric acid and alkali treatment stages to remove calcium carbonate and proteins, respectively, followed by a bleaching stage with chemical reagents to obtain a colourless product. Processing is expensive, because wherever environmental controls are enforced, disposal costs must be added The step requiring the most reagents, and therefore one of the most expensive, is demineralization. This has been carried out with different acids: hydrochloric The concentrated acid whey (60–80 g lactose/l) used in this study was obtained from Vega e Hijos S.A. (San José de la Rinconada, Seville, Spain). Whey was stored at 4  The inoculum was prepared by cultivating the bacteria in 50 ml of a medium containing (per litre): 20 g yeast extract, 5 g trypticase, 0.25 g K Unless otherwise noted, the medium used to feed the bioreactor was prepared by diluting whey with tap water (∼40 g lactose/l) and supplemented with some industrial-grade nitrogen sources (1.0–5.0 g/l), including yeast extract, casein hydrolysate, and sunflower protein hydrolysate The immobilized-cell bioreactor comprised a glass column packed with spiral-wound terry cloth Crayfish ( Cell concentration was determined by absorbance measurement at 620 nm. The pH of samples and fermentation broth was measured using a Crison electrode (Crison Instruments S.A., Barcelona). Protein concentration was determined by high-performance liquid chromatography amino acid analysis after hydrolysis with 6 N HCl at 110 °C for 24 h, according to the method of Alaiz et al. Solid-state  Crayfish was fractionated by flotation–sedimentation, according to a procedure previously described in our laboratory Chemical characterization of both PF and CF is given in Traditionally, the commercial preparation of chitin from crustacean shell involves the use of hydrochloric acid as demineralizing agent. In an attempt to find an alternative to the use of HCl, some research groups are studying different fermentation processes, such as lactic In this study, lactic acid was produced from whey lactose in a batch-fed fermentation process, using immobilized cells of Lactic acid production and CF demineralization is shown in  The raw chitin obtained by lactic acid fermentation, treated with 0.5 M HCl, 0.25 M NaOH, and a 1:5 dilution of hypochlorite in successive 6 h steps at room temperature, gave a purified chitin of good quality, similar to that available commercially for food and medical uses, as shown by its FT-IR and This study was supported by a Grant from ‘Plan Nacional I+D del Programa FEDER’ (1FD97-0634) of the CICYT and EC to J. Bautista. The authors would like to thank Dr M.D. Alba for performing the