It is well documented that surface oxidation of copper sulphide minerals has some detrimental effects on their flotation performance. However, little work has been done to quantitatively relate surface oxidation to flotation performance, which makes it inherently difficult for processing plants to optimise flotation conditions for oxidised ores. In this study, an array of oxidised chalcopyrite and chalcocite samples was prepared and characterisation of the surface oxidation species was carried out by X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS). The degree of surface oxidation was quantified as the ratio of hydrophilic species to hydrophobic species and correlated with copper sulphide flotation recovery. A quantitative relationship between them was established and a critical degree of oxidation, beyond which flotation becomes impossible, was identified to be 11.7 for chalcopyrite and estimated to be in the range of 1.74–4.85 for chalcocite, indicating that chalcocite flotation is much more sensitive to surface oxidation. This study will enable provision of guidelines to better manage oxidised copper ores to circumvent the loss of recovery and will also help in developing potential solutions that could be applied to flotation of minerals with different degrees of oxidation.Copper sulphide minerals, found in the primary and secondary enrichment hydrothermal zones, yield the most copper production throughout the entire globe. The most commonly found copper sulphides in the primary zone are chalcopyrite (CuFeS As these copper sulphide minerals are semiconductors, their surfaces are reactive and oxidise upon exposure to air and aqueous solutions during stockpiling, crushing, grinding and flotation. As a result, oxidation plays a crucial role in flotation as it alters the surface properties of the minerals and affects adsorption of collectors onto the minerals. Extensive research, employing electrochemical and surface sensitive analytical techniques, has been conducted over the years to understand this oxidation process and its ramifications on copper sulphide flotation ( The unanimous view amongst researchers is that this oxidation process could culminate in effects either desirable or detrimental to mineral flotation. “Mild oxidation” could lead to enhanced hydrophobicity of the copper sulphide minerals owing to surfaces rich in intrinsically hydrophobic species such as elemental sulphur and polysulphides ( However, “mild” and “significant” oxidation are relative terms and cannot be adopted in quantitatively defining the degree to which a mineral surface is oxidised. Little work has been done to quantitatively relate the degree of surface oxidation to copper sulphide flotation, which makes it inherently difficult for processing plants to optimise flotation conditions for oxidised ores and explore potential solutions that could be tailored to flotation of minerals with different degrees of oxidation. Therefore the unanswered fundamental question is: how much is “mild” and how much is “significant” with regard to the degree of mineral surface oxidation? Moreover, a parameter of paramount importance, the “critical degree of surface oxidation”, defined as the degree of surface oxidation beyond which mineral recovery by true flotation becomes virtually impossible, needs to be determined. A previous study by Therefore in the quest to quantitatively relate surface oxidation to copper sulphide flotation and to determine the critical degree of surface oxidation, the present study focused on representatives of both primary and secondary type copper sulphides Chalcopyrite and chalcocite mineral samples, supplied by GEODiscoveries, Australia, were crushed using a jaw crusher and a rolls crusher and screened to collect the −3.35 + 0.71 mm size fractions. The processed mineral samples were then sealed in polyethylene bags and stored in a freezer to minimise further surface oxidation. The chemical compositions of chalcopyrite and chalcocite, obtained by employing Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectroscopy (ICP-MS), are presented in The thionocarbamate based RTD11A, from Tall Bennet, was used as the collector and DSF004 from Orica was used as the frother. They were both of industry grade and used as received. Hydrogen peroxide (30% w/v, AR grade) was used as the oxidising agent. Pulp pH was adjusted using sodium hydroxide (AR grade). Grinding and flotation were carried out using Brisbane tap water. Crushed single mineral samples (100 g) of chalcopyrite or chalcocite were ground in a laboratory stainless steel mill to achieve a P XPS analyses were carried out using a KRATOS Axis Ultra X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer, incorporating a 165 mm hemispherical electron energy analyser. The incident radiation source is monochromatic Aluminium (Al) X-ray Kα x-rays (1486.6 eV) operating at 150 W (15 kV, 15 mA). The sample analysis size spot is about 300 × 700 µm. The frozen slurry samples were defrosted just prior to characterisation. The solids were placed on the sample holder and immediately transferred into the loading chamber of the spectrometer. All XPS measurements were conducted under cryogenic conditions to avoid evaporation of volatile species such as elemental sulphur on the mineral surfaces under the ultra-high vacuum conditions. This was achieved by pre-cooling the samples in the loading chamber to −160 °C before evacuation and maintaining that temperature during analysis in the sample analysis chamber (SAC) using liquid nitrogen cooling. Samples were analysed at a base pressure of An oxidation methodology was developed to yield different mineral flotation behaviours by conditioning the mineral samples with hydrogen peroxide solutions of different concentrations for 10 min after grinding and prior to flotation. It should be noted that although H It can also be observed from Surface characterisation was carried out to determine the types and concentrations of the species that formed on the chalcopyrite and chalcocite mineral surfaces upon oxidation after chemical treatment with various concentrations of hydrogen peroxide. The XPS spectra and related discussion are presented in this subsection for both copper sulphide minerals. It should be noted that the selection of samples for surface characterisation was based on a “significant” difference in flotation recovery. For chalcopyrite, the samples conditioned with 0, 10, 20 and 40 wt.% H Shown in The peak at 707.4 eV in the Fe 2p The S 2p spectra of chalcopyrite are presented in The results for surface characterisation of chalcocite are presented in The quantitative information (atomic concentrations) of the surface species on chalcopyrite and chalcocite shown by the XPS spectra in the preceding section is presented in The atomic concentrations of the surface species were further used to calculate the degree of mineral surface oxidation for both copper sulphides. The surface hydrophobicity and floatability of the copper sulphides upon oxidation in typical alkaline flotation conditions are primarily controlled by two opposite processes, dissolution of metal ions that produces sulphur-rich hydrophobic surfaces, and precipitation of metal hydroxide and oxide that produces hydrophilic surfaces ( Presented in Chalcocite surface oxidation exhibited a rather different dependency on hydrogen peroxide concentration compared to chalcopyrite surface oxidation, as already demonstrated by its flotation behaviour, the results of which are shown in It is vital to note the factors by which the degree of mineral surface oxidation increased subject to treatments with various concentrations of hydrogen peroxide for chalcopyrite and chalcocite. From the increment factors and their corresponding hydrogen peroxide concentrations quoted above, it is evident that the chalcocite surface was much more sensitive to oxidation than the chalcopyrite surface. An increment factor of 9 in the degree of surface oxidation was obtained by the treatment with 10 wt.% H However, at the onset of the oxidation process (in the absence of H Flotation recoveries as a function of the degree of mineral surface oxidation for both chalcopyrite and chalcocite are presented in The chemically untreated mineral surfaces, with degrees of oxidation of 0.694 for chalcopyrite and 0.198 for chalcocite, yielded very good flotation recoveries of 89.3 and 97.5%, respectively. A degree of surface oxidation of 5.90 led to a 17.4% drop in chalcopyrite flotation recovery, while a 55.9% drop was observed at a degree of surface oxidation of 9.13. For heavily oxidised chalcopyrite surfaces, with a degree of surface oxidation of 16.4, 5.95% recovery was obtained, accounting for an 83.4% recovery drop from the recovery of chemically untreated chalcopyrite. For chalcocite, a degree of surface oxidation of 1.74 yielded a flotation recovery of 71.7%, accounting for a 25.8% loss in recovery. The heavily oxidised chalcocite surface at a degree of oxidation of 4.85 yielded a mere 1.80% recovery, representing a 95.3% loss in flotation recovery. It must be noted that while such a tremendous recovery loss was observed in chalcocite flotation, for the mineral surface treated with 10 wt.% H The flotation behaviour of chalcopyrite was best described by the Dose-Response function (Eq. In Eq. Contrary to chalcopyrite flotation, chalcocite flotation as a function of the degree of surface oxidation was best described by a second-order polynomial function, as expressed by Eq. The parameters It is crucial to note that a degree of surface oxidation of about 5 was sufficient to render the chalcocite surface critically oxidised, about 2.4 times less than the 11.7 beyond which the chalcopyrite surface reached a state of critical surface oxidation, further illustrating the resistance of the latter copper sulphide to surface oxidation. This infers that chemical methods usually tailored, such as sulphidisation, to restore the floatability of oxidised copper sulphides through formation of metal sulphide phases or species that would facilitate collector adsorption prior to flotation, should consider formation of a metal sulphide phase that is intrinsically resistant to surface oxidation, such as a primary type copper sulphide mineral like chalcopyrite. This can potentially improve the efficiency of the current sulphidisation process in place to address the challenge of oxidation, as it has proved to suffer from drawbacks such as failing to restore floatability of sulphides that are heavily oxidised and those that are sensitive to surface oxidation ( A method for quantitatively relating the degree of mineral surface oxidation to copper sulphide flotation, which involves quantification of the proportions of hydrophilic and hydrophobic surface species by the surface sensitive technique XPS, has been developed. This will serve as an instrument to predict flotation mineral recoveries as a result of the degree to which the surfaces have been oxidised. Therefore it will serve as a guideline to help flotation plants to better manage oxidised ores to circumvent losses in recoveries as well as to explore potential solutions that could be tailored to flotation of ores with different degrees of oxidation. The critical degree of surface oxidation was mathematically determined for the primary copper sulphide chalcopyrite, while it was estimated for the secondary copper sulphide mineral chalcocite, to be 11.7 and in the range of 1.74–4.85, respectively. This is of paramount importance as it serves as a stepping-stone in exploring novel ways to modify surface properties of the minerals, which are otherwise completely unamenable to the most efficient sulphide mineral separation technology, in a quest to reverse the adverse effect of oxidation and restore their floatability. The authors would like to express their gratitude to the following companies and institutions;