A new manufacturing process for metal matrix composites has been invented, namely accumulative press bonding (APB). The APB process provided an effective method to produce bulk Al/10vol.% WCp composite using tungsten carbide (WC) powder and AA1050 aluminum sheets as the raw materials. The microstructural evolutions and mechanical properties of the monolithic aluminum and Al/WCp composite during various APB cycles were examined by scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffractometry, X’pert HighScore software, and tensile test equipment. The results revealed that by increasing the number of APB cycles (a) the uniformity of WC particles in aluminum matrix improved, (b) the porosity of the composite eliminated, (c) the particle free zones decreased and (d) the cluster characteristics improved. Hence, the final Al/WCp composite processed by 14 APB cycles showed a uniform distribution of WCp throughout the aluminum matrix, strong bonding between particles and matrix, and a microstructure without any porosity and undesirable phases. The X-ray diffraction results also showed that nanostructured Al/WCp composite with the average crystallite size of 58.4nm was successfully achieved by employing 14 cycles of APB technique. The tensile strength of the composites enhanced by increasing the number of APB cycles, and reached to a maximum value of 216MPa at the end of 14th cycle, which is 2.45 and 1.2 times higher than obtained values for annealed (raw material, 88MPa) and 14 cycles APBed monolithic aluminum (180MPa), respectively. Though the elongation of Al/WCp composite lessened during the initial cycles of APB process, it increased at the final cycles of the mentioned process by 78%. Role of WC particles, uniformity of reinforcement, porosity, bonding quality of the reinforcement and matrix, grain refinement, and strain hardening were considered as the strengthening mechanisms in the manufactured composites.Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are widely used in aerospace, military, and automotive industries due to their excellent properties such as high ratio of strength/density, improved elastic modulus and high wear resistance Many potential applications of MMCs prompted the present authors to invent and propose another solid state process named accumulative press bonding (APB) for manufacturing MMCs. Up to now, tungsten carbide (WC) is the only particle dispersed in the surface layer of metals such as aluminum and, consequently, the resultant hard coatings improves the wear properties of matrix As-received commercial AA1050 aluminum strips with the dimensions of 100 To create a satisfactory metallurgical bond by press bonding, it is essential to remove any contamination that may be present on the surface of the aluminum strips. The aluminum surfaces usually contains humidity, dust particles, greases, adsorbed ions, and alumina oxide. Several authors  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Philips XL30) was employed to examine the distribution of WC particles through the different cycles of APB process. The X-ray pattern of the manufactured Al/WC The tensile test specimens were machined from the APBed strips, according to the ASTM E8/E8M standard. The gauge width and length of the tensile test specimens were 6 The microstructure variations of Al/WC The XRD pattern and Williamson–Hall plot of the 14 cycles APBed composite are shown in  The variations of the tensile strength and the elongation of Al/WC As it can be seen in Despite the proven advantages, conventional MMCs production processes suffer from (a) poor distribution of the reinforcement particles in the matrix, (b) high level of porosity in the composites, (c) undesirable chemical reaction between the reinforcement and matrix, (d) weak bonding quality between the reinforcement and matrix, and (e) disability of producing some of the MMCs such as Al/WC A novel process for manufacturing metal matrix composite was invented, based on accumulative press bonding process. Using WC When the number of APB cycles increased, the uniformity of WC particles in the aluminum matrix and bonding quality between them improved. The manufactured Al/WC The XRD analysis showed that the nanostructured Al/WC The tensile strength of the composites increased by increasing the number of APB cycles, and reached to a maximum value of 216 The elongation of Al/WC The authors gratefully acknowledge Mr. Shahab Ranjbar Bahadori for his assistance with this investigation.