Wrist fractures are seen commonly in everyday orthopaedic practice. This article discusses many of the key areas around recognition, understanding, management and current opinion on fractures involving the distal radius and distal ulna.Although Abraham Colles is credited as the father figure and progenitor of distal radius fracture recognition and management, the French physician, JL Petit, first suggested in 1705 that post-traumatic deformity of the wrist may not be due to dislocation (as was commonly thought), but was actually caused by fracture. These ideas were confirmed in the writings of Claude Pouteau (published in 1783 after his death) who stated; Abraham Colles published his landmark work in 1814 and highlighted the reasons why so much debate had existed about the true nature of the injury when he stated; The physical signs of distal radius fracture did not correlate with those of other long bone fractures – most likely due to impaction and relative ‘stability’ of the fragments in the displaced position. The major difficulty for Colles and his contemporaries was that they were describing a fracture 80 years before the discovery of X-rays – which did not occur until 1895. Considering contemporary investigations and imaging, the continuing use of the eponym ‘Colles fracture’ in modern surgical practice can be seen to be potentially inaccurate and perhaps even inappropriate. Dupuytren contributed much to the confirmation that these injuries were fractures, not dislocations, in the publication of the results of his post-mortem dissections in the mid 19th century. These confirmed to the medical profession that these injuries were true fractures, and that most were dorsally displaced. Further clinical descriptions ensued. Dr John Rhea Barton described a shearing-type fracture in 1838, RW Smith of Dublin described a fracture featuring palmar displacement in 1847, yet it would be more than a century before it was realized that fractures of the distal radius could be more than simple extra-articular injuries. Most commonly, injuries occur after a simple fall from standing height. Rarely do clinicians take any more detailed history. Yet much information can be gained from asking patients to It is natural to pronate the forearm as you fall forwards, and supinate it as you fall backwards. Impact on the pronated forearm is likely to be on the radial side of the wrist, whilst that on the supinated forearm is likely to be on the ulnar side of the wrist. This information stimulates thought as to which other associated structures could be injured during the fall. A fall forwards will focus the examination on the radial structures in the wrist; a fall backwards will draw attention to the ulnar structures. Almost all distal radius fractures (apart from dorsal rim avulsion fractures) can be produced by hyperextension of the wrist. Important work, published by Rikli and Regazzoni, on load transfer across the wrist described the existence of three separate structural ‘columns’ within the wrist. The intermediate column is the major load-bearing column of the wrist, confirmed by the dense subchondral bone seen in X-rays of the intact radius. This also explains its involvement in ‘dye-punch’ articular depression injuries. In addition to being a central structural column, the intermediate column also provides the radial component of the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) – the sigmoid notch. The bone quality in this distal ulnar corner of the radius is universally good (as a result of its function) and, by virtue of its involvement in both flexion/extension and forearm rotation movements, forms the key area when planning surgical fracture reconstruction. Consequently, surgical reconstruction of the fractured distal radius will concentrate on restoring the integrity and shape of the intermediate column (together with the orientation of the two associated joint surfaces) before restoring the buttressing function of the radial column, and the pivotal function of the distal ulna. Many different authors have produced a multitude of different classification systems – each claiming to describe fracture patterns clearly and reproducibly, and each claiming to help with either treatment planning or outcome prediction. We do not intend to describe each of these in detail in this article, but there are some principles that can be taken from a variety of classification systems. In 1967, Frykman published a classification system that was important in being the first to recognize the involvement (and relevance) of injuries to the distal ulna. Separate classifications of distal ulnar fractures have also been described and are useful in understanding the impact of fracture patterns on both stability and congruity of the DRUJ. When considering the classification of a wrist fracture, it is critical to understand the individual personality of each injury. This will include the presence of articular injury, fragment displacement, instability, soft tissue injury, associated injuries, distal ulnar injury and individual patient characteristics. All of these will have an influence on both the management decisions and the outcome. Prognostically, anatomic reduction is still felt to be important, but the necessity for this is questionable in the low-demand population. An extra-articular fracture involves neither the radiocarpal nor distal radioulnar joint surfaces. Typically metaphyseal, these injuries classically occur as low-energy bending injuries ( Significantly displaced or ‘off-ended’ fractures ( Debate exists as to how best to manage those fractures that are displaced enough to be considered for reduction in some individuals, but not in others, dependent on other co-morbidities and functional demands. There is no clear solution and it may be very difficult, at the outset of treatment, to predict which mildly displaced fractures will cause later functional disturbance. There are a multitude of studies demonstrating significant functional impairment associated with malunion, with evidence of reduced range of motion, grip strength and manual dexterity in malaligned distal radius fractures. However, there are equally valid studies refuting these findings, with little loss of motion or grip strength reported. A recent paper by Forward et al has shown that although patients with malalignment of the distal radius do demonstrate degenerative change radiographically at long-term follow up, this is not related to functional impairment, despite measurable loss of grip strength in these wrists. Certain clear guidelines do exist, however. A recent review of the literature has suggested that restoring radial length to within 2 mm and articular congruency to within 2 mm, improves functional outcome. There is less consensus regarding the importance of restoring dorsal/palmar tilt, with the suggestion that tilt should be restored in the presence of carpal malalignment but can, in some circumstances, be considered acceptable. Dorsal tilt will shift the load borne through the radial surface to the dorsal rim, resulting in an increased force per unit area, The increasing cohort of patients over 60 years of age in today’s society brings a number of challenges. This group of patients was previously both chronologically and biologically elderly, but is now maintaining fitness and activity levels for many years after retirement. Not only do this group live independently for longer, they also continue to contribute to society in employment and child-care. Consequently, functionally limiting wrist fractures can change them from contributor to dependent. Fracture patterns in this group are usually extra-articular metaphyseal bending fractures, although injuries can involve both the distal radius and ulna. The general fitness and functional demands of an individual will dictate the degree of intervention and the accuracy of reduction that is desirable. Patients with low functional demands will often have a good functional outcome despite significant clinical and radiological deformity, whereas physiologically younger patients with high functional demands at the time of injury are less tolerant of malunion. The advent of angularly stable anatomic implants designed for application on the palmar surface of the distal radius has dramatically altered the way these patients can be managed. Articular fractures involve the harder subchondral bone and therefore usually result from a greater energy of injury. Consequently, these fractures are seen more frequently in young, active adults. This presents a particular challenge because these individuals had perfect wrist function and high demands at the time of their injury. They expect to be able to return to their pre-injury activities. The frequently high-energy modes of injury (sport, traffic accidents, falls from height, etc) also increase the incidence of associated injuries – which may have a significant impact on the overall outcome. Articular fractures involve the radiocarpal joint, the distal radioulnar joint or both ( Articular fractures are generally considered to recover best if anatomical reduction and stabilization is performed at an early stage to allow functional active range of motion rehabilitation. The historical work of Knirk and Jupiter When planning the surgical reduction and fixation of an articular fracture, a choice of surgical approaches exists. Prior to the introduction of palmar anatomic locking plates in the past decade, the dorsal approach was preferred. At the same time, developments in implant technology occurred to allow a larger number of fracture patterns to be stabilized with implants applied on the palmar surface of the distal radius. Reduction was achieved by closed, open or indirect methods, and the implant (which must be angularly stable) could be used to stabilize the reduction. Not all fracture patterns can be stabilized with an implant placed on the volar surface of the distal radius. Whilst the development of anatomic (shaped) implants has undoubtedly increased the spectrum of fracture patterns manageable The most common type of fracture pattern requiring a dorsal approach is the displaced dorso-ulnar fragment, which forms part of both the radiolunate joint and sigmoid notch. The orientation of the dorsal extrinsic wrist ligaments is such that closed manipulation and reduction by ligamentotaxis is not possible for these fragments. Since they form such a critical part of the radius, accurate and stable reduction is essential. A dorsal approach may be required in such cases. Angular stability is produced in an implant when the threaded head of the screw inserts into a threaded hole in the plate. This demands that the hole for the screw is drilled precisely perpendicular to the threaded plate hole, or the screw will not fit. As a result, the location and position of each screw are fixed relative to the plate. The newest concept of locking implants is to allow a locked screw to be inserted in different trajectories through the same screw hole, so as to aim accurately for smaller bone fragments, rather than have the screw path pre-dictated. This ‘variable angle’ technology still provides angular stability when tightened, but there is a greater choice of screw position within the fragments. The recent advances in locking plates have removed the focus from alternative techniques for managing distal radius fractures. However, for those fractures which are too fragmented to be managed by internal fixation, closed reduction and K-wire fixation Complications associated with external fixation are numerous. In addition to pin tract infection, injury to the superficial branch of the radial nerve, stiffness of the radiocarpal joint and fingers, and Complex Regional Pain Syndrome are well documented, but can be reduced with meticulous surgical technique. Intra-articular fractures of the distal radius remain difficult to treat and although recent papers tend to support internal fixation, Plain radiographs are usually available when patients are first seen in an Emergency Department. Surgeons are also used to requesting CT scans to further understand the fracture pattern and fragment displacement. It is important to look critically at plain radiographs to obtain the maximum amount of information, because these are the only investigations available during surgery and surgeons must remain conversant with the more subtle pieces of information available on these images. A thorough knowledge of radiographic anatomy is essential when reconstructing fractures of the distal radius and ulna. Similarly, a 3D appreciation of the geometry of each of the bones and how they articulate is also necessary. Almost all wrist fractures are easier to understand and visualize when a CT scan is available in addition to plain radiographs. Once the fracture pattern has been fully understood on CT data, it is recommended that the surgeon returns to once more examine the plain radiographs. This will help to assimilate knowledge of the radiographic appearance of common fracture patterns, so that plain radiography (either in the form of plain X-rays or image intensifier views) becomes more meaningful ( A lateral plain radiograph of the wrist will not reveal any information other than the condition of the lunate fossa and sigmoid notch of the distal radius. The scaphoid fossa cannot be seen in this view. A 20° inclined lateral will, however, provide this information and should form a routine part of preoperative screening. Similarly, a PA plain radiograph does not provide any information on whether or not subchondral screws have penetrated the joint surface. A 15° inclined PA view will be parallel to the joint surface and give accurate information on screw penetration and joint congruity. Other more sophisticated imaging, such as MR arthrography, is extremely useful when assessing associated injuries but will provide little assistance in managing the skeletal elements of the injury. The distal ulna forms the third column of the wrist. Fractures of this bone have, until recently, been largely ignored. Fractures of the ulnar styloid are commonly seen, but their relevance is poorly understood. The distal ulna can fracture in several different patterns; simple neck, comminuted head, simple neck + ulnar styloid and multifragmentary extending into the distal shaft. Stability will be threatened by either displaced fractures of the articular surface, or avulsion of the stabilizing structures (most frequently the foveal attachment of the TFCC). Under load, the styloid attachment of the TFCC contributes little to stability, whilst the foveal attachment contributes greatly to DRUJ stability. This explains why fractures of the tip of the styloid are so innocuous, whilst fractures at the base are significant contributors to instability. Joint congruity can be assessed by plain radiography and by CT scan. Accurate reduction and stabilization is necessary in displaced injuries to restore the ulna as both a pivot for forearm rotation and a stable buttress for contact with the sigmoid notch of the distal radius. Fractures involving both distal radius and ulna are often misunderstood and managed as a radial fracture alone. These are forearm fractures that happen to be near the wrist, and should be managed in the same way as a diaphyseal injury of both bones ( When distal ulnar fractures are stabilized by secure internal fixation, early rehabilitation can involve active and passive forearm rotation movements. This reduces the risk of scarring of the interosseous ligament and consequent permanent restriction of movement. Ulnar styloid fractures are frequently seen, but rarely require active treatment. The significance of the attachment of the deep fibres of the TFCC in the ulnar fovea means that oblique basistyloid fractures are the most likely type of ulnar styloid fracture to require active stabilization. Clinical examination of DRUJ stability, as described above, will guide the surgeon. Arthroscopic studies have proved that associated injuries occur frequently. A study by Richards et al identified TFCC tears in 53% of intra-articular fractures, scapholunate ligament tears in 21.5% of intra-articular fractures and lunatotriquetral ligament injuries in 6.7% of intra-articular fractures and 13.3% of extra-articular fractures. A dorsal, open approach, when performing internal fixation, will allow direct inspection of the intrinsic ligaments, but these approaches are less frequently performed with modern implants. Consequently, the clinician must have a high index of suspicion when assessing wrist fractures, and look for any clue or suggestion of associated injury. Certain fracture patterns give rise to a greater risk of certain associated injuries. For example, a separate radial styloid fragment – particularly if displaced – will temporarily leave the scaphoid unsupported by the scaphoid fossa, whilst the lunate remains stable within the radiolunate joint ( It remains unusual, however, to identify an associated injury in the acute setting. They are usually discovered in the weeks after injury when rehabilitation is unexpectedly poor, or physical signs reveal themselves. Clinicians treating wrist fractures must always consider possible associated injuries during each consultation until rehabilitation is complete. Fractures of the distal radius are common in childhood, and almost universally result in a normal functional outcome. The majority of fractures are buckle or torus fractures ( Care must be taken to identify a Galeazzi fracture-dislocation, since these injuries demand early reduction and stabilization. Growth will correct the radial deformity in time in many cases, but DRUJ biomechanics may suffer irreversible damage before this correction is complete. Growth arrest is uncommon, complicating approximately 4% of all physeal injuries of the distal radius, but up to 50% of displaced physeal fractures of the ulna.  Complications after wrist fracture can be classified into:    Early complications include median nerve injury (disturbance from the time of injury) carpal tunnel syndrome (caused by oedema in the first hours after injury) redisplacement (after manipulation or surgical treatment) associated injury Medium term complications include delayed or non union (rare except in both bone or open fractures) stiffness and loss of motion (wrist and/or digits) complex regional pain syndrome (type I) – CRPS I ulnar wrist pain Long-term complications include malunion osteoarthritis permanent loss of motion cosmetic deformity Each specific complication has its own specific management. The awareness of potential complications is the best tool for avoiding them. Outcome is difficult to measure after wrist fractures. The same radiographic fracture pattern treated in the same way by the same surgeon will often produce widely different results in different individuals. Various objective measurements of functional outcome have been described, from the much-used Gartland & Werley demerit scoring system (1951) to more modern assessments of global upper limb function (DASH) and general wellbeing (SF-36). None of these are reliable enough to critically appraise comparative management methods. The Cochrane database has clearly stated that insufficient evidence exists in even the most scientifically rigorous clinical studies, to ascertain the ‘best’ treatment methods for wrist fractures. As a result, we are condemned to continue managing these injuries with our favourite techniques (or, alternatively, avoiding our least favourite techniques) insecure in our knowledge that we are providing the ‘best’ treatment. There are many excellent pieces of scientific and clinical evidence available when making decisions about fracture management around the wrist, but the variability of our patients (and – to a degree – the variability of our clinicians) makes objective comparison impossible. There remain some recommendations about how best to avoid a poor outcome, although even these have exceptions that are regularly quoted by those with a different view. These recommendations would include: Correct the radiographic anatomy Identify and manage associated injuries Consider reduction of articular steps greater than 1 mm Control oedema and pain at an early stage Consider the ulna in all wrist fractures Be aware of risk factors for redisplacement osteoporosis comminution tenuous stabilization Fractures of the distal radius are common, and their assessment and management are often taken for granted. However, an appreciation of the structure and function of the wrist and the application of sound biomechanical principles allows a reasoned approach to decision-making and can facilitate treatment choices, both operative and non-operative. Articular reconstruction of the radiocarpal and distal radioulnar joints optimizes function, whilst the appreciation of the functional importance of the distal ulna and its soft tissue attachments should avoid undertreatment when these structures are involved in the injury.