Introduction
                  Surgical site infections (SSI) studies rely on an imprecise and debatable definition. The term “wound healing problems” (WHP), not necessarily septic, is also frequently cited. This study had the objectives of determining the frequency of early SSIs in traumatology, these terms eventual correlation, and the factors influencing onset.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A multicenter prospective observational study was conducted in 12 centers. The exclusion criteria were open lesions as well as multiple injuries and multiple fractures (more than two fractures treated surgically). All patients were followed for the first three postoperative months until there was clinical certainty of healing and absence of infection. The presence of any WHP or SSI required a minimum follow-up of 1 year. WHP and SSI risk factors were determined using logistical regression adjusted on the centers.
               
                  Results
                  Out of 1617 cases, 103 were complicated by a WHP and 22 by a SSI. The SSIs were mainly secondary to Staphylococcus infections. The factors predisposing the patients to WHP and SSI (p
                     ≤0.05) were age; the NNIS, ASA, and Parker scores; alcoholism; antiaggregant use; and the locoregional aspect at the time of injury. The 522 subcutaneous osteosyntheses “near the skin” resulted in 58 WHPs (11%) and 14 SSIs (2.7%); 13 of the 58 WHPs (22%) resulted in one SSI. Out of 707 deep osteosyntheses, 24 (3.4%) presented a WHP and seven (1%) a SSI; Four SSIs originated from a WHP. The 352 fractures of the trochanter were complicated by a WHP in 15 cases (5.5%) and a SSI in one case (0.4%) after interlocked nailing and two WHPs and two SSIs (2.5%) after screw and plate fixation. Of the 388 first-line arthroplasties, only the prostheses implanted for a proximal femur fracture presented complications: 21 WHPs (6%) and one SSI (0.02%). Of the 103 WHPs of the entire series, 18 became SSIs. In absence of WHP, the SSI rate was 0.2%, whereas the probability of a WHP evolving toward a SSI was 100 times higher. The only factor significantly associated with a WHP becoming a SSI was osteosynthesis material exposure.
               
                  Discussion
                  This prospective study can be criticized on several points: the deliberately limited inclusion criteria, the short follow-up, and the possible subjectivity of the data collection. The SSI rates reported are for the most part in agreement with the literature. This study is innovative in traumatology given the large number of patients and the notion of WHP that was preferred over superficial infection. It demonstrates the relations between WHP and SSI, in particular for osteosyntheses near the skin.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III.Surgical site infections (SSIs) are among the most dreaded complications, most often requiring surgical revision, altering the clinical and radiological result and calling into question the liability of the operator This study had the objectives of determining the frequency of early SSIs in traumatology and their reciprocal relations, as well as establishing the predisposing factors; it is based on a clinical prospective series. A multicenter prospective observational study osteosynthesis with superficial bone sites (called “near the skin”), located in the elbow, the patella, the ankle, and the tibial pilon; osteosynthesis on deep sites, for closed or open fractures of the femoral, tibial, humeral diaphysis and the diaphysis of the upper extremity of the humerus and femur; first-line arthroplasty of the hip and shoulder. Based on a common observational data sheet, all patients were followed up for the first three postoperative months until there was clinical certainty of healing and absence of infection. Any WHP or SSI observed during this period led to a minimum follow-up lasting 1 year. Risk factors were sought based on logistic regressions adjusted on the centers. The relative risk associated with a variable X was measured using the odds ratio with 95% confidence intervals and significance was evaluated with a one-tailed test at the 5% level. Significance was set at The 1617 cases included 522 osteosyntheses that were superficial, “near the skin,” 707 osteosyntheses located in a deep site, and 388 arthroplasties: 103 were complicated by a WHP and 22 by a SSI ( The statistically significant factors predisposing patients to WHP were age; NNIS, ASA, and Parker scores; alcoholism; taking an antiaggregant; and the locoregional aspect at the time of injury. An intermediate rate of significance was found between the presence of cognitive impairment and taking anticoagulants prior to injury. The statistically significant factors predisposing patients to SSI ( Of the 522 osteosyntheses near the skin, 58 WHPs (11%) and 14 SSIs (2.7%) were observed. Thirteen of the 58 WHPs (22%) resulted in a SSI ( The statistically significant predisposing factors to SSI ( Of the 707 deep osteosyntheses, 24 (3.4%) presented a WHP and seven (1%) a SSI ( First-line surgeries included 388 arthroplasties, 41 (12 shoulder hemiarthroplasties/29 reverse total shoulder arthroplasties) for the proximal humerus, 39 (12 hip hemiarthroplasties, HHA, and 27 total hip arthroplasties, THA) for the trochanter, and 308 (192 HHAs and 116 THAs) for the femoral neck. The femoral neck lesions were for the most part transcervical (75% of the cases) and displaced as defined by Garden grades III and IV (83% of the cases). None of the humeral arthroplasties showed a WHP or SSI complication. Of the 349 proximal femoral arthroplasties, 21 were found to have a WHP (6%) and one a SSI (0.02%) ( Of the 103 WHPs observed for the overall group, 18 transformed into a SSI but with a variable frequency dependent on the injury groups, with the osteosyntheses near the skin the most exposed to evolving toward a deep infection: in this group, one WHP out of five became a SSI ( In the subgroup of trochanter fractures, WHP and SSI occurrence was compared between intramedullary nailing ( For the arthroplasty or osteosynthesis procedures of proximal humerus and femoral neck fractures ( This prospective study has several limitations. The first is the deliberately limiting inclusion criteria; the most habitual fracture sites were chosen and the techniques that a priori offer the greatest safety in terms of infection. This explains the exclusion of open lesions, patients with several injuries, osteosyntheses in which migration of the implant material is relatively frequent (e.g., wiring of the wrist or the humerus), and closed lesions treated with external fixation whose pins are often the seat of cutaneous intolerance Approximately 5% of the traumatic lesions included in this prospective cohort were followed by a WHP and 1.5% by a SSI; these rates are close to those recently published for the most frequent fracture sites The osteosyntheses “near the skin” presented higher rates of WHP and SSI (11% and 2.7%, respectively). The frequency of SSIs after this type of osteosynthesis is explained by the occurrence of septic infection in more than one WHP out of five (22.4%). A high rate of WHP evolving to SSI was noted at the distal tibia (22% of the cases), the patella (17%), and the distal humerus (12%), in agreement with the published series WHP complicates deep osteosyntheses in 4.8% of cases, as do SSIs in 0.8% of cases; 11% of WHPs evolve to SSI. The highest WHP rate was observed for the distal tibia (3.6%), in agreement with the literature Arthroplasties were complicated by a WHP in 5.4% of the cases, by a SSI in 0.2%. Shoulder arthroplasties were not complicated by WHP or SSI, in relative agreement with the literature This study met its first goal in setting a WHP and SSI rate in the early follow-up of the most habitual surgical interventions in traumatology. These rates for the most part agreed with the literature. This work is innovative in traumatology, in particular underscoring the notion of scar tissue problems. It emphasizes the relation between WHP and SSI and establishes risk factors related to the fracture or the patient. Some cannot be prevented, but several should lead to modification of the first-line surgical technique. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. Our thanks are extended to M. Goldzak (Clinique de l’Union, Toulouse), J. Benoistand, J.-L. Pollard (CHU de Rennes), O. Roche (Centre Émile-Gallé, Nancy) and C. Chantelot (CHU de Lille) for their active participation in this study.