The purpose of this study is to show how the different size fractions of coal are affected during a process of biodesulphurization in a packed column and to examine the repercussions of the process on the elimination of certain heavy and trace elements. The total desulphurization obtained in 51 days is about 25wt%, as only pyritic sulphur is attacked. The greatest reduction in sulphur content was for the 1–0.5mm fraction although the lowest actual sulphur content was found in particles of under 0.125mm, where it dropped from 1.76 to 1.17wt%. The most important changes in the metal content were decreases in Ni, Cu, Zn, As, Cr, Co and Sr, mainly in the smaller sizes.Parallel to the implantation of new methods of physical and chemical desulphurization of coal, research has been going on into other processes in recent years, including biodesulphurization. Experiments have been carried out with organic biodesulphurization Compared with biological methods of desulphurization using heaped coal, the use of an experimental column packed with coal offers such advantages as the reduction of negative environmental impact and lower production and investment costs. Some researchers have reported that the coal types with which they were working carried bacteria capable of depyritizing coal Some papers report the economic viability of biodesulphurization to be very low, with a cost increase of $23 per ton. On the basis of an experiment with a 2 The present study also analyses the effect of coal biodesulphurization on the elimination of certain heavy and trace elements. Society is becoming more and more concerned about pollutants in the air, in water and in the soil. Pollutants such as As, Cd, Hg, Pb, Se and B present in coal even as trace elements are particularly worrying because of the vast amounts of coal burnt daily to produce energy. Among the techniques being developed to render coal clean, those based on biological methods are becoming increasingly important. Furthermore, today, the micro-organisms used in coal bioleaching processes The aim of this study is to increase knowledge of the biodesulphurization process in a packed column. The desulphurization rate for different size fractions has been studied together with the behaviour of different metals during this process. In the laboratory, ten columns with a diameter of 40 The columns were charged with the same mass of identical samples and the operation started at the same time. After a fixed period of operation, one column was switched off and a coal sample removed for analysis. The next column was switched off after a further period of operation, and so on till the full test was completed. The experiments were carried out using anthracite coal with a total sulphur content of 3.02 The inoculum was prepared with the bacteria inherent in the coal to be treated. A culture rich in bacteria (10 Given the minimum volume required to flood the column, a 5 A temperature of 15–20°C and a pH of 1.5 were used as these are the optimal conditions for maximum desulphurization The process involved three stages: stabilization, desulphurization and washing. During stabilization, there were large variations in the pH of the inoculum owing to the alkalifying properties of the coal, which was controlled with water acidulated with sulphuric acid at pH 1.5, and passed through the column until the leachate achieved a steady pH of 1.5. During the desulphurization stage, the inoculum was first introduced at the top of the column, when the percolating liquid was circulated through the column at a flow rate of 100 A portion of the sulphates generated during the desulphurization process gave rise to precipitates that were hard to dissolve (jarosites) and which adhered to the coal grain, making it necessary to wash the coal in the column with diluted hydrochloric acid in the final stage. The coal samples treated at different residence times were analysed by the energy dispersive polarized X-ray fluorescence (XRF) method to ascertain the evolution of certain metals during treatment. Ten columns were used with different coal residence times. After treatment, the coal was dried and sized from 4 to 0.125 Five samples: c1, c3, c5, c7, c10, representing initial and 6, 18, 36 and 51 days of treatment, respectively, were chosen for detailed analysis. Determinations of sulphur and ash levels are shown in The rate of elimination of sulphur, expressed in g of sulphur removed per g of coal per day, is greater at the beginning of the process for the intermediate sizes than for the finest ones ( As the amount of sulphur initially present in the finest fraction (<0.125  When the trace elements indicated in Ni falls for all particle sizes under 2 The quantity of Cu changes with treatment but the size of the decrease and the time taken for it to occur are not clear. The smaller coal particles show the clearest elimination of Cu (down from 211 to 32 There is an anomalous behaviour in the evolution of Zn in the samples smaller than 0.125 For arsenic the extent of the decrease is not very clear for the smaller particles but for the four largest particle diameters as is noticeably attacked. Zinc and arsenic evolve similarly to sulphur, with approximately 20% elimination. Stannite (Cu Cr amounts fall mainly in the first days of treatment but elimination later slows up, and reduction is only to be observed in particles of under 0.125 Co amounts also fall, with the greatest dissolution rate observed in the smaller particle (55–13 Sr content is reduced in particles under 0.125 Coal biodesulphurization in a packed column reduced total sulphur content by nearly 30%, with the greatest reduction for the 1–0.5 This biotreatment brought about modifications in the content of certain metals, especially Ni, Cu, Zn, As, Cr, Co and Sr mainly in the smaller sizes but in some cases, for instance Ni shows a clear decrease for particles under 2 The authors would like to thank The Regional Government of Castile and León for supporting the project on the development of the coal biodesulphurization process.