The inventive capacity of South African universities and researchers is investigated through analysis of university patent applications. Patent applications to the South African Patent office from 1996 to 2006 are used as an indicator of inventive capacity. The investigation determines, for the first time, patenting activities of local universities at the South African Patent Office for the past 10 years and it identifies the performance of faculties and departments. We suggest that patent analysis of local patent offices in developing countries provides a more comprehensive picture of inventive activity than the analyses in the main patent offices in USA and Europe.
                  The assertion that industrial experience affects the inventiveness of academic staff is also investigated. The study finds that most inventors or co-inventors held at least one position in industry, or in some cases, specialized parastatals (non-university institutions) prior to patent application. The study supports the idea that experience and the professional trajectory of scientists through migration from industry to university leads to an increase of researchers’ scientific and technical human capital which is convertible into high performance or inventive capacity. We argue that this linkage is valid equally in developed and developing countries (like South Africa) and that universities internationally wishing to improve their entrepreneurial character should aim to employ academic with industrial prior experience.Access to knowledge and technology is recognized as one of the key steps towards the economic growth and well being of all nations. Many developing and developed countries strengthen their technological capacities as this can yield rapid increases in the productivity of both the capital and labor employed in the developmental process. Technological capacity is viewed here as the knowledge of “the technologies available; the ability to evaluate and select such technologies, to utilize, adapt, re-create and finally to further develop them” ( Universities, in general, are currently undergoing a second revolution, incorporating economic and social development as part of their mission. The first academic revolution made research an academic function in addition to teaching. Today, the emerging entrepreneurial university integrates economic development as an additional function ( The common mechanisms through which technology transfer between university and industry occurs are: (i) spin off companies, (ii) licensing, (iii) publication, (iv) meetings, cooperative R&D agreements, (v) joint research venture, personnel training, (vi) supervision of post-graduate students, etc.  Both the growing social pressure which are demanding useful research and the shrinking of academic research budgets that are motivating increase in focus on exploitable research are also influencing public R&D institutes to forge the partnership with the industry to facilitate technology transfer. Important benefits expected from this partnership are: (i) exchange of technological information and sharing of R&D cost and risks, (ii) learning vehicle to accumulate new skills and broaden the effective scope of activities and reduce technological uncertainty, (iii) gain access to financing, partner's R&D facilities, expertise and new innovative technologies, (iv) networking to keep abreast of research get clash of views and cross-fertilization of ideas ( The quest for best practices in the interaction between academia, industry and government that leads to a significant increase in inventive and innovative capacities is of obvious importance for policy of both public and private sectors as well as for institutional and portfolio evaluation. Patents are documents providing legal protection of inventions and are the outcome of a complex process involving a dedication of a large volume of resources, including intellectual, technical etc; by research institutions to carry innovative activities ( The objective of the present study is two-fold: (i) to identify the patterns of patent activities in South African universities, (ii) to identify the influence of business work experience in academic inventive capacity. This is the first time South African universities’ patenting activity in the South African Patent Office is investigated. Our study considers patenting activities at national level in contrast to studies which use patenting in a foreign patent office (USPTO, EPO, JPO). Similarly we investigate the effects of prior working experience of academics in the private sector. Whereas the literature focuses mostly on various forms of partnership between institutions, including strategic alliances, network, joint research ventures etc are pursued for this end ( A research similar to ours conducted by Dietz and Bozeman ( We assume that if technical capital is thus embodied in researchers working in industry as both Provided that our investigation for South Africa will have similar findings as in the technological advanced countries, we could argue that the effect of industry work experience on academics—improved inventiveness—is a universal phenomenon and that universities internationally could use the finding as a policy instrument. Next we describe the workings of the South African patent system; we outline the methodology used to gather data, and we discuss the findings. The South African patent system is managed by CIPRO (Company and Intellectual Property Registration Office) located in Pretoria, South Africa. In terms of the South African Pact Act (1978), a patent application may be filed by inventors, applicants or through the assistance of an expert in the patent matter (e.g. an attorney). South Africa is one of the 124 countries that accept the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), allowing individuals to file an application at both local and international level in parallel. The international designates the countries in which applications are feasible. CIPRO follows section 25 of the South African Patent Act (Act 57) of 1978, defining patentable inventions to be: (i) those which involve inventive steps, and which are applicable to trade, industry or agriculture (ii) anything consisting of: (1) discovery, (2) scientific theory, (3) mathematical method, (4) scheme, rule or method for performing a mental act or of doing business, (5) a program for a computer. The registration involves the following steps: (i) Search of existing patents. This step is not essential but is advisable to avoid infringing existing patents. It can be conducted by the inventor or the applicant. (ii) Application to Register. Any of the following methods can be applied: (1) Filing a provisional patent application. The cost in Rands (R) is R 60 and the process can be undertaken by the inventor, the applicant or with the assistance of an attorney or other expert. (2) Filing a complete application. (For ease of comparison 1 US Dollar is approximately equal to 7 Rands.) The cost is R 266 and this step must be undertaken with the assistance of an expert (attorney). (3) File a PCT. The process is considered when necessary. (iii) Registration. After a provisional patent application has been filed, the office of patent opens a file and provides a provisional application number. After 12 months the complete application can then be submitted. When the application has been lodged, a formal examination usually lasting 6 months takes place. If successful, the application is accepted and the applicant is then required to publish his/her patent in the government owned Patent Journal. If within a three month period no objections have been made by the public, a Patent Certificate is issued. The lifespan of a patent can last 20 years, provided that it is renewed annually before the third year. Hardcopies of patent applications and some patents granted are compiled in registers which are accessible to public. Registers are in many volumes and are arranged chronologically in a CIPRO's library. Indexes and cards are available in the library and can facilitate the search of patent applications, grants, and other intellectual property information. An electronic database of intellectual property, like patents, copyright, etc. is in the development phase and does not cover all the information available. Core information on patent application file appears in the following order: application number (and date), type of application (complete or provisional), title of application, name(s) of applicant(s), name(s) of inventor(s), country of priority, priority number, and priority date. Five universities, with intense patent activities, including Stellenbosch University (SUN), University of Pretoria (UP), University of Cape Town (UCT), University of the North West (UNNW), and University of Witwatersrand Johannesburg (WITS) were investigated. Patent applications were collected from 1996 to 2006. Only patents owned by universities were considered. Patents owned by researchers (especially where researchers were applicants and owners) were not included. Hard copies of application files have been obtained from the Patent file Database, at CIPRO in Pretoria. The patent application indexes, cards and registration book were also used for verification of accuracy. Applications were counted manually and covered the whole year, i.e. from January to December. For the year 2006, the count went up to July. Details about application dates, names and addresses of inventor and co-inventor(s), applicants and assignees were obtained from the application files. For each claim, only the provisional application was used to avoid double or multiple counts. Complete application was only used when the provisional was not available. Additional details of applicants, faculties and inventors were obtained from university and faculty web sites. Amongst the inventors were also students, post-doctoral fellows and lecturers. Curriculum vitae of inventors were obtained from various sources including faculty or department web pages, professional association membership databases, journal articles (brief cvs), telephone calls and e-mail to inventor(s), etc. From five universities 245 patent applications were collected; 186 cvs of corresponding inventors (mainly professors and in some cases lecturers) were obtained and analyzed. The control group has been created to test the importance of previous industry work experience on the determination of inventive capacity of university researchers. The control group consisted of 30 professors from the same departments (including Botany, Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, Chemical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Microbiology, Biochemistry, Civil Engineering, Metallurgical Engineering and Veterinary Science) and from the institutions studied, i.e. SUN, WITS, UP, UNNW and UCT. A matching sampling approach was followed. None of the professors of the control group belonged to the initial population of inventors of the 245 patent applications investigated in this study. Names of these professors were obtained from the home pages of their departments and as necessary, they were asked by e-mails and/or telephone calls to provide their cvs. All members of this group were professors, mainly male, and aged between 35 and 60 years. Members of this group had the same background characteristics, belonging to a same institution; same departments and face the same labor market conditions that can affect performance. Analysis of the cvs identified two sub-groups. The first sub-group was made of 10 professors who all had previous industry work experiences. Seven of them had patent applications before the period in which patent applications are investigated in the present study, i.e. before 1996, and the remaining three professors had no applications. The second sub-group included 20 professors who had no previous industry work experience. None of them had a patent application. The selection approach clearly made the two sub-groups of the control group significantly homogeneous and thus suitable for the comparison of their inventiveness based on the sole effect of previous industry working experience. In other words the threats to validity of comparison of the two sub-groups were significantly minimized. Considerable weight was thus given to the sole criteria of comparison, and the previous industry working experience, and the latter was zero in the second sub-group of control group, made of 20 professors. Due to the large magnitude of the difference in inventiveness of the two sub-groups of the control group, it appeared unnecessary to validate such difference through other statistical tests.      The Department of Microbiology shows the highest inventive capacity with six applications and is followed by the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, which have 12 applications. The Department of Chemistry has eleven applications and Biochemistry four. The Departments of Forestry, Wood Science and Mechanical Engineering have three applications each. The Departments of Chemical engineering and Medical Virology each have two applications. The Department of Civil Engineering has only one application.  The Department of Physics displays the highest inventive capacity with eleven patent applications and is followed by the Department of Chemical Engineering which has five. The Department of Molecular and cell Biology has four applications, Chemistry, Pharmacy and mechanical Engineering each have three applications. The Departments of Civil Engineering, Medical genetics and Electrical and Information engineering each have two patent applications. The Departments of Orthopaedics and Physiology have one application each.    In this article we first investigate the inventive activity of five South African Universities as it is manifested in patent applications to the South African patent office. CIPRO provides a more detailed picture of South African inventive activities than USPTO. The University of Pretoria has the highest overall patent applications and is followed by the Stellenbosch University, the University of Cape Town, the University of the Witwatersrand and the University of the North West. The performance of the five universities has been compared based on their inventiveness in the faculties of Science, Engineering and Health. The University of Pretoria has the highest inventive activities with 67 patent applications and is followed by Stellenbosch University, which has 51. The University of Cape Town has 44 applications, the University of the Witwatersrand 37 and the University of the North West 17. The faculty of Science of the Stellenbosch University appears to have the highest inventive capacity with 31 patents amongst the institutions considered. Two departments including Microbiology with 16 applications and Chemistry with 11 appear to be the major contributors to the inventive capacity of this faculty. The University of Cape Town follows Stellenbosch University in Science with 20 applications the most of which being made by the Departments of Molecular and Cell Biology which has 13 applications and Chemistry which has four. The University of the Witwatersrand comes after the University of Cape Town with 18 applications. The major part of the University of the Witwatersrand applications are from the Departments of Physics which has 11 applications and Molecular and Cell Biology which has four. The University of Pretoria has 16 applications mainly from Microbiology with five and Botany four and Biochemistry with three. Lastly the University of the North West has two applications, all from Chemistry. The University of Pretoria leads in the faculties of Engineering with 45 applications. The major part of these applications is from the Departments of Chemical Engineering, which has 15 and Electrical Engineering, which has 14. The Departments of Mechanical Engineering and Metallurgical Engineering each have seven applications. Stellenbosch University follows the University of Pretoria with 18 applications most of these coming from the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering which has 12 and Mechanical Engineering which has three. The University of Cape Town comes after Stellenbosch University with thirteen applications. The major part of these applications is from the Department of Chemical Engineering, which has six applications and Biomedical Engineering (Biomechanical Engineering), which has five. The University of the North West has thirteen applications, the major part of them coming from the Department of Electrical Engineering which has seven and Chemical Engineering which has five applications. The University of the Witwatersrand has 12 applications, the major part of them coming from the Department of Chemical Engineering which has five applications and Mechanical Engineering three. The faculties of Health are dominated by the University of Cape Town with 11 applications, the major part of them coming from the Department of Pharmacy which has four and Chemical pathology three. The University of the Witwatersrand follows the University of Cape Town which has seven applications, mostly from the Department of Pharmacy which has two and Genetics which has two. The University of Pretoria comes after the University of the Witwatersrand with six mainly from the Department of Pharmacology which has four applications and Radiation Oncology which has two. Stellenbosch University has two applications from the Department of Medical Virology and the University of the North West has one application. The dramatic increase in inventive activities at WITS in 2005 and the decrease of such activities at UP from 2002 as well as the big differences in inventive activities amongst institutions and departments are subject of further research. It is worth mentioning that the analysis of inventive activities of the five South African institutions considered in this study at the USPTO (US Patent and Trademark Office) gives a low coverage of patenting activities. UP, for example, has only five patents granted; WITS zero, UNNW one, UCT two and SUN one. This suggests that CIPRO provides a more detailed picture of South African inventive activities compared to that of USPTO. Considering patent application at national level can provide a broader picture of innovative or inventive activities in countries. The overall performances of South Africa however over the period of 10 years which is less than 300 patents, appear to be far below that of other countries. Italy, for example, had about 1475 patent applications (from universities) from 1978 to 1999 ( In the second leg of the investigation we find that industrial work experience actually enhances inventive capacity (as measured by patent applications). Inventive capacity of professors endowed with industry experience typically differs from that whose entire career is spent in academia. Prior industry working experience of scientists working at university appears to be an effective mechanism (through which knowledge is transferred from industry to university and) that increases the university's inventive activities. The evidence displayed by the test of the control group seems in line with the general observation on the strong association between industry work experience and patent applications. Our findings support strongly the hypothesis that previous working experience in the private sector affects positively inventive activity. The analysis of inventive activities of the five South African institutions considered in this study at domestic level reveals that CIPRO provides a more detailed picture of South African inventive activities than foreign patent offices such as USPTO. Considering patent application at national level can provide a broader picture of innovative or inventive activities in foreign countries. However the equivalence of local and international patents should first be established. A related issue is the question of why South African academics patent locally and not abroad. Is it an issue of costs, market considerations or they find it easier to apply in a patent office which grants patents using different criteria? In general, though it can be argued that indicators based on local patent offices can provide valuable information that is not always available through analyses of patents granted by foreign patent offices. The overall performances of South Africa over the period of 10 years, appear to be far below that of other countries. South Africa's relevant policy authorities and the ‘universities’ administrations should consider the enactment of appropriate incentives in order to improve the inventive outputs of the country's universities. Employing researchers with prior industry or business experience, building a strong entrepreneurial capacity, strengthening the management capabilities of technology transfer offices, promoting effective links with the private sector, setting up research joint ventures, collaborations with technology incubators, adopting royalty and equity policies that stimulate researchers to invent and innovate are some examples in this direction. The dramatic increase in inventive activities at WITS in 2005 and the decrease of such activities at UP from 2002 as well as the big differences in inventive activities amongst institutions and departments are subject to further research. In the second leg of the investigation we find that prior industry working experience of scientists working at universities appear to be an effective mechanism that increases the universities’ inventive activities. Invention is certainly a complex process that heavily requires specific skills from various areas of industry (production, development and applied research, etc.) which have to be combined with other resources to generate novel and useful product or process. Our findings are similar to those of The authors gratefully acknowledge the constructive comments of the editor and the anonymous reviewers of Technovation.