A series of polyoxypropylene alkyl ethers, which includes common flotation frothers such as DF-200, DF-250 and DF-1012, have been tested. The “frothing” properties of these compounds were investigated through measuring their effect on bubble size and dynamic foamability index.
                  The tests revealed a definite relationship between the number of propoxy groups in the CH3(OC3O6)
                        n
                     OH molecule and the critical coalescence concentration (CCC) values, and the values of the dynamic foamability index (DFI). The results also show a clear correlation between the CCC and DFI values. Such a correlation was earlier reported for the hexanol derivatives.
                  It has been shown when testing frother blends that the molar ratios of blend constituents can be based on the corresponding CCC values of the individual frothers.Numerous studies on the effect of collectors on solid's wettability and flotation have led to a well-established conclusion that the major role of the collector is to render a treated mineral hydrophobic. The role of frother is not so clear; it is believed that it provides finer bubbles, stabilizes the froth and—according to the Schulman–Leja penetration theory The difficulties inherent in giving a comprehensive scientific analysis of flotation frothers were already well recognized 50 year ago Since a few hundred agents have been patented as flotation frothers, and many are industrially used, testing such agents in different applications does not yield much useful data that can be generalized. Since MIBC is one of the most common frothers, we selected different hexanol isomers/derivatives and studied their fundamental properties in our two recent contributions List of the frothers tested in this project is given in Aqueous solutions of the tested frothers were prepared using distilled water. All the tests were carried out at room temperature (21±1 °C). Bubbles were generated in an Open Top Leeds Flotation Cell set at 1000 rpm at an air flow rate of about 5 dm  Since the first two members of the investigated series, CH The frother blends were prepared by mixing MIBC with each of the Dowfrothers in the same molar ratio as their CCC values  The volume–gas flow rate plots that were obtained for MIBC, DF-200, DF-250 and DF-1012 frothers following Malysa's In the discussed procedure The DFI values for the tested frothers are given in Behavior of the MIBC/DF-200, MIBC/DF-250 and MIBC/DF-1012 blends The DFI values for the tested frother blends are given in The results obtained indicate that with the increasing number of propoxy groups per molecule in the homologous series of polyglycol frothers, the ability of these compounds to reduce the bubble size improves. There is a definite relationship between the number of propoxy groups in the molecule and the CCC values of the tested frothers It is known from flotation practice Application of frother blends becomes quite common Some of the features of The fact that a powerful frother such as DF-1012 produces metastable foams that are different from wet foams produced by less powerful frothers may have a very strong effect on flotation selectivity. The project represents a collaborative research between the Department of Mining and Mineral Process Engineering, University of British Columbia and the Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Cape Town and was made possible thanks to the grants provided to T.T and P.W. by the UBC–UCT Student Exchange Program. The authors are grateful to Dr. Dee Bradshaw of the University of Cape Town for all her arrangements, and to Dr. K. Malysa of the Institute of Catalysis and Surface Chemistry for a valuable discussion.