Accurate characterization of two phase bubbly flows is crucial in many industrial processes such as fluidized reactors, ore froth flotation, etc. The bubble size determines the rate at which components present in the gas phase are transferred to the surroundings and vice versa while bubble rate defines the appropriate bubbly flow regime occurring in the heterogeneous system. This research work employs deep neural networks (DNNs) to predict bubble size and bubble rate using data obtained from validated computational fluid dynamics (CFD) computations. Pure water and slurry (in conditions similar to those employed in mineral froth flotation) case studies are evaluated. It is found that the DNN can predict the CFD results accurately when using four hidden layers, describing discontinuities in the bubbly flow regime. The relative errors computed between the CFD data and the prediction obtained by the DNN is as low as 8.8% and 1.8% for bubble size and bubble rate, respectively. These results confirm that the DNN can be applied to sophisticated fluid dynamics systems and allow developing better control process strategies since once the DNN is trained critical variables can be computed very efficiently. The slurry case study, although restricted to the application of mineral froth flotation, can also be generalized to other industrial operations keeping the exact same procedure.Main or major bubble axis, [m] Secondary or minor bubble axis (perpendicular to “ Bubble diameter, [m Inlet diameter for gas in the system, [m] Bias of the encoder of the DNN Bias of the decoder of the DNN Air flowrate, [m Root-mean-squared deviation Bubble volume, [m Input vector of the DNN Estimation of Weights of the encoder of the DNN in the pre-training Weights of the decoder of the DNN in the pre-training Dynamic viscosity of the slurry phase Dynamic viscosity of water Water density, [kg/m Slurry density, [kg/m Solid density, [kg/m Surface tension, [Nm] Water percent in the slurry phase Solids percent in the slurry phase Volume fraction of solids in the slurry phase Determining bubble size distribution and other characteristics of bubbly flows is a challenge and a necessity for a number of industrial operations such as mineral processing, oil industry, wine industry, wastewater treatment, fluidization reactors, bioreactors, etc. The application of ordinary neural networks (NNs) has penetrated many applications fields dramatically and the mapping and prediction of fluid dynamic equations has been a highly fruitful field for scientific research Reliable computational fluid dynamics (CFD) data are often used to simulate pressure and velocity fields in complex systems such as bubbly flows in different applications such as mineral froth flotation among others  CFD simulations of bubbly flows were obtained from a 3D cylindrical system sketched in Eq. The viscosity equation for high volumetric concentrations of particles has been determined utilizing the equation The surface tensions used for both liquids are summarized in  Volume of each bubble was estimated with two images captured from two different angles 90° apart. First, the boundary of the tank was extracted and the remaining image was removed. Next, the bubble edges were detected. The volume of fluid (VOF) is determined by the boundary of the bubble that is defined between 0 and 1. In this paper, the threshold to detect the bubble boundary was made equal to 0.5 Jamialahmadi and collaborators In order to train a “deep architecture” the greedy layer-wise approach was adopted to pre-train the DNN. Greedy layer-wise initializes the weights of the deep network by training each layer at a time. The first stage named encoder, takes an input vector The weights of the decoder, After pre-training the first layer, the procedure is repeated to all the hidden layers. Once the pre-training is complete, the training process of all the hidden layers takes place with the backpropagation algorithm. A DNN was trained with 19 sets of inputs–outputs; then, the prediction accuracy of the trained DNN was evaluated with the 20th set of input–output that was not seen in training. This scheme was repeated for each input–output set. There is no universal method to determine the optimal number of parameters for a network. It depends on the structure of the problem at hand and on the available training dataset. Different DNN architectures were tested in order to find the architecture with the lowest RMS error The performances of DNNs with one, two, three and four hidden layers are compared. In addition, each one of the architectures tested was optimized with respect to the number of neurons on each hidden layer that was varied from four neurons to 20 neurons with a step equal to two. The pre-training and training epochs were set at 1000. The activation function in the hidden layers corresponds to a sigmoid, and the activation function in the output layer is linear. For the DNN with one hidden layer the optimum number of hidden neurons was equal to ten, with a RMS error of 0.0735 in bubble rate and 0.0549 in bubble size. The lowest RMS error of the DNN with two hidden layers was equal to 0.0715 for bubble rate (ten neurons in the first hidden layer and 12 neurons in the second hidden layer) and 0.0500 for bubble size (four neurons in the first hidden layer and 12 neurons in the second hidden layer). The lowest RMS error of the DNN with three hidden layers was equal to 0.0619 for bubble rate (ten neurons in the first and second hidden layers, and eight neurons in the third hidden layer) and 0.0324 for bubble size (12, eight and 12 neurons in the first, second and third hidden layers, respectively). The DNN architecture with the lowest RMS corresponded to the four hidden layer architecture. In this case, the RMS was equal to 0.0162 and 0.0534 for bubble size (12, six, eight and six neurons in the first, second, third and fourth hidden layers, respectively) and bubble rate, with the same number of hidden neurons, respectively. The relative error between the CFD data and the DNNs prediction is 8.8% and 1.8% for bubble size and bubble rate, respectively. The computer used to train and test the DNNs had an Intel i5 1.5 The DNN framework predicted accurately the bubble size and bubble rate obtained from CFD simulations. The relative errors between CFD data and DNN predictions for bubble size and bubble rate are as low as 8.8% and 1.8%, respectively, indicating that the technique is suitable to estimate these features of bubbly flows system. Moreover, the four hidden layer DNN allows describing the whole range of bubble sizes and bubble rates tested including discontinuities in the bubbly flow regime. These results corroborate that the DNN can be applied to sophisticated fluid dynamic problems such as slurries in conditions close to those employed in the mining industry in froth flotation operations. This procedure can also be generalized to other industrial operations enabling the development of better process control strategies because once the DNN is trained critical variables can be computed very efficiently. The research reported here was funded by