Background
                  Management of Displaced Intra-articular Calcaneal Fractures (DIACFs) continues to be technically demanding. The literature has not been definitive in its guidance for surgeons dealing with these injuries. Recent publications have further added to the lack of clarity. This review is intended to summarise the present state of knowledge, and provide some genuine guidance for clinicians.
               
                  Objectives
                  To review previous research, focussing on articles published within the last fifteen years, and summarise the findings to aid surgeons in managing DIACFs with choosing best management for patients.
               
                  Methods
                  We reviewed the best evidence and literature, focussing on articles published within the last fifteen years, and summarised findings into workable recommendations. Variables of (1) patient, (2) the associated soft tissue injury and (3) the fracture characteristics were used to aid surgeons in choosing the best of the available options for each patient that presents with a DIACF.
               
                  Authors summary
                  Management of DIACFs can best be divided into four broad categories: (i) non-operative management, (ii) open reduction and internal fixation, (iii) minimally invasive reduction and fixation, and (iv) primary subtalar arthrodesis. The evolution of the literature would suggest orthopaedic surgeons managing calcaneus fractures should have an expert's knowledge, surgical expertise and the latest techniques to cover these four options, to tailor the treatment of DIACFs to the individual patient.Displaced Intra-articular Calcaneal Fractures (DIACFs) present a potentially debilitating problem for a patient and a management dilemma for most orthopaedic surgeons. The literature has not been consistent with regards to benefits of an operative intervention over non-operative management. There are trends in the literature to suggest anatomic reduction, both through the articular surfaces and shape, and stable fixation with avoidance of complications results in the best outcome in terms of earliest possible restoration of function, patient satisfaction and minimisation of post-traumatic arthritis An assessment of functional status (SF-36 scores) of patients with DIACFs shows significantly poorer results than those for other orthopaedic conditions and those of the normal population The UK Heel and Fracture Trial is a recent multicentre randomised controlled trial that has suggested that there is no benefit from open reduction and internal fixation for DIACFs Two recent published long term studies, beyond twelve years, looking at results of patients originally randomised to operative versus non-operative management have been published Because of the variety of ‘personalities’ of calcaneal fractures, no one technique is likely to manage every calcaneal fracture. With this variability in mind, we believe that management of DIACFs can best be divided into following four broad categories: Non-operative management Open reduction and internal fixation Minimally invasive reduction and fixation Primary ORIF and subtalar arthrodesis Orthopaedic surgeons managing DIACFs should have skills for these four options, taking into account the patient, the limb and the fracture that is presenting. In the authors’ experience, the treatment of DIACF's has followed trends over the last few decades, with all methods having respect in the literature ( It has been confirmed that these challenging injuries have better outcomes when managed in institutions with greater case volumes In some patients with DIACFs, there are identifiable factors that decrease the expected outcome of surgical management and increase the risk of complications with operative management. In these patients, non-operative management may be preferable. Non-operatively managed patients should be treated with rest, ice, elevation, and early range of motion. Splinting should be discontinued, if used at all, and early movement of their ankle and hind foot should be started within 5 to 10 days of injury to minimise the associated hindfoot stiffness. Analgesia needs to be adequate from an early stage, as we feel the tendency for immobilisation for comfort may ultimately add to the difficulties in rehabilitation. The patient should most probably remain non-weightbearing for 6 weeks, although it is acknowledged that some authors allow partial weightbearing earlier Open reduction and internal fixation through an extended lateral approach has been the most frequently utilised technique for surgically restoring the calcaneal anatomy through the last three decades Minimally invasive reduction and fixation techniques have primarily been devised because of the concern over wound healing and are becoming increasingly popular amongst the international orthopaedic community. Currently, there is no consistency in the techniques described by surgeons to meet with the criteria of being “minimally invasive”. There is also limited literature supporting the quality of intra-articular reduction achieved by these techniques. However, published reports of case series and techniques are increasing Minimally invasive techniques are all technically demanding in their endeavour to achieve anatomic reduction and stable fixation to allow early mobilisation. They are not designed to improve on any reduction and fixation achieved by an extended lateral approach. Each of the techniques tends to involve indirect reduction manoeuvres, relying on ligamentotaxis to achieve reduction, often through a variant of that described by Essex-Lopresti In some fractures, the articular comminution and cartilaginous injury are so significant it can be concluded that adequate joint reduction cannot be reliably achieved and primary subtalar arthrodesis may be the best management for the individual to achieve the best possible outcome The selection process for experienced foot and ankle trauma surgeons, to encourage best patient outcome, is heavily dependent on (a) patient factors, (b) the limb and the nature of the soft tissue injury as well as the (c) characteristics of the fracture ( Patients with co-morbidities have greater risk of peri-operative complications. With regards to ORIF, as mentioned, the most common complication is related to wound healing. These are more common in, but not isolated to, patients with peripheral vascular disease, poorly controlled diabetes and smokers. There is a cumulative effect with these identified risk factors Patients with osteoporosis are at a risk of loss of inadequate purchase of fixation and this may lead to a loss of reduction or backing out of screws and result in skin irritation, compromise of ability to wear footwear, infection and requirement for screw removal. The presence of co-morbidities should be an influence on the treatment options where it is clear they will have a negative impact on the outcome. In patients who are skeletally immature, extra-articular calcaneal fractures and DIACFs have traditionally been suggested to do well regardless of whether they have operative or non-operative management The paper published by Buckley et al., Females under 60 years of age have been shown to have a significantly better outcome with surgical intervention than those treated non-operatively Those of lower functional demand for work and recreation have been suggested to not benefit from surgical intervention. A significant number of patients are manual labourers and expected to return to their previous occupation It has been shown that a patient's involvement in litigation, a worker's compensation scheme or other insurance claim associated with their injury, has a negative influence on their long-term functional outcome regardless of management An economic evaluation of operative compared to non-operative management of DIACFs identified that there was a cost benefit in providing surgical management due to the quicker return to work and a lower rate of subtalar arthrodesis It has been identified by the authors of the largest RCT involving DIACFs that 1 in 10 patients sustaining DIACFs have a diagnosis of a psychiatric disorder [Buckley R, personal communication, January 2014]. The prevalence of psychiatric disorder in patients with DIACFs may vary hugely in different communities, not necessarily as a result of an increase in psychiatric disease, but because of the variance in incidence of industrial or road traffic accidents being the cause of calcaneal fracture. Prolonged periods of non-weightbearing or options which increase the likelihood of second surgeries, and associated stress to the patient that presents, are probably best avoided. Primary ORIF and subtalar arthrodesis, with the earlier potential of weightbearing and probable decreased incidence of second surgeries seems advantageous in this patient group. Non-operative management presents a similar benefit to earlier weightbearing and avoidance of the associated stress of surgical management. It would seem that under these circumstances, there is an increased need to plan treatment on the basis of patient reliability and their willingness to collaborate in their treatment. Given that a lot of these conclusions have been drawn from the largest randomised controlled study performed by the Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Society over a decade ago Swelling about calcaneal fractures is expected. The onset of swelling is rapid and is frequently associated with ecchymosis and fracture blistering. Respect for the soft tissues is paramount and appropriate delay of timing for surgery and customisation of surgical approach is often required to avoid poor outcomes. All patients who present with DIACF, should in principle be treated initially with rest, elevation, ice and compression Open calcaneal fractures have a high incidence of complications No demographic difference has been identified between those patients sustaining bilateral DIACFs with those who experience unilateral DIACFs. However, some differences have been recognised. It has been identified that those patients sustaining bilateral DIACFs have a significantly more depressed Bohler's angle than in patients with unilateral DIACFs. They experience a poorer range of motion after their injuries, regardless of management, than those with unilateral injuries and they were significantly more likely to require late subtalar arthrodesis if they were treated non-operatively When calcaneal fractures are imaged carefully with CT scan, accurate diagnosis and management can be planned. The axial images highlight the extension of the fracture anteriorly, the calcaneocuboid joint, and the sustentaculum tali as well as the level of medial comminution, the alignment of the tuberosity fragment, the breadth of the heel with lateral wall “blow out” and the integrity of the sustentaculum fragment. The sagittal images allow assessment of joint fragment depression and the tuberosity fragment displacement. The anterior process involvement and rotational displacement of the superolateral fragment are also assessed. The 30° semi-coronal images allow assessment of posterior facet comminution, sustentaculum tali displacement, calcaneal body widening and associated subfibular impingement from lateral wall “blowout”. The facet joint assessment allows characterisation of the fracture to be made using the classification system designed by Sanders Fracture pattern characteristics that are felt to have little to gain from operative management, are ones that are truly undisplaced or have minimal articular involvement with less than 2 Buckley et al. The treatment of comminuted intra-articular calcaneal fractures (Sanders IV) is still debated. The need for additional procedures because of the development of post traumatic osteoarthritis of the subtalar joint following a DIACF has been reported to be 23% in Sanders type III injuries but up to 73% in the type IV fractures Significant loss of calcaneal height has been shown to have negative effect on outcome True extra-articular fractures of the calcaneus, not involving the subtalar joint, account for approximately 20% of all calcaneal fractures There is no level I or II evidence to assist with the management of the extra-articular fractures. Despite not having posterior facet involvement, extra-articular fractures can have significant disruption to calcaneal shape with increase width, and loss of calcaneal height and length. A key issue is that the rotated posterior fragment may endanger posterior skin necessitating urgent surgery. This fracture type can also result in significant disability of motion, function, and comfort in footwear. Surgical correction of extra-articular fractures is frequently required to minimise these sequelae. This fracture pattern can be managed reliably with a minimally invasive reduction and fixation technique DIACFs continue to be technically demanding injuries to manage. The literature has not been definitive in its guidance of surgeons managing these injuries. There are trends in the literature to suggest anatomic reduction and stable fixation with avoidance of complications results in the best outcome in terms of earliest possible restoration of function, patient satisfaction and minimisation of post-traumatic arthritis Further large well designed studies involving modern surgical techniques and specifically including patient variables in study design as much as the characteristics of the fracture are necessary to challenge present day patient care paradigms. The authors of this paper have no conflicts of interest to declare in the preparation and submission of this manuscript. No sources of funding have been received for the preparation of this manuscript.