Thermochemical materials (TCM) can be used for seasonal heat storage, storing high amounts of thermal energy coming from the sun in summer and releasing it in winter, when heating for houses is needed. One promising TCM for building comfort applications is the Na2S/water pair due to its high energy density and appropriate reaction temperature that can be achieved by a solar collector. Nonetheless, Na2S reacts with oxygen and is corrosive to metals, especially with those used to build up heat exchangers or reactors that contain the TCM. Therefore, corrosion tests in a self-developed experimental setup under vacuum conditions, 13 mbar, between Na2S⋅9H2O/5H2O and two reactor metals – copper and stainless steel 316 – have been performed. Since copper is corroded and is highly used for thermochemical reactors, two promising coatings, Halar and electroless nickel, have been applied. Furthermore, aluminium has also been tested coated with these coatings. Halar is a potential candidate to protect both copper and aluminium heat exchangers/reactor that may contain Na2S/H2O pair for thermochemical energy storage. Stainless steel 316 is also corrosion resistant to the selected TCM.Thermal energy storage (TES) is extremely necessary to match the energy available and the demand. This could lead to thermally independent houses, which would have a positive effect in reducing the global CO In this paper the focus is on thermochemical materials (TCM) that undergo a chemical reversible reaction to store and release energy. TCM is an emerging energy storage media with the potential for high density leading to compact thermal energy storage systems Corrosion causes big investment costs; results of one study show that the total annual estimated direct cost of corrosion in the U.S. is a staggering $276 billion, approximately 3.1% of the nation's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) In a previous study Some of the most studied TCM work better under low pressures There are several types of coating that can protect almost all metals available for engineering use from air, water, acid corrosion, saline ambient, etc. The aim of this study is to develop a device to test corrosion between TCM and metals, under vacuum and controlled temperature. Moreover, experimental corrosion tests have been performed in this setup looking for the suitable material to build up vessels or reactors that contain Na From the recent literature published in this field The present setup is designed and built to perform corrosion tests simulating closed and integrated TCM reactors. Glass has been selected for being an inert material able to stand high temperatures, low pressures, and allowing direct visual inspection. The design was thought to obtain a versatile, multifunctional device that can operate under a wide range of pressures, temperatures, and different atmospheres, therefore several TCMs. A general view of the setup is shown in The vacuum pump runs in continuous mode, to assure vacuum inside the reactor. The vacuum pump presents an outlet for venting gases, which is directed to the fume hood, being cooled previously (cooling unit) to collect condensed outlet water vapour and other condensable gases. For each metal sample, four specimens are needed. One is the reference and the other three are tested for a week in contact with the TCM. The three specimens are replicates in order to ensure the repeatability of the experiments. To evaluate the results, a methodology accordingly to the setup has been designed. Two different methodologies, one for the single metal specimen and one for the coated metals, are detailed here. First, the metal specimen are cleaned (no polished, no brushed, only acetone). Then, they are weighted in a precision balance (±0.01 mg) AG135 from Mettler-Toledo and are visually observed by a Zwek optical microscope. The coated specimens are weighted in the same precision balance, but observed in an ESEM Quanta 200 FEI, XTE 325/D8395 scanning electronic microscope (SEM). An SEM is needed for the coated samples since more precision and resolution are required to measure the coating thickness. At this point the methodology merges and three specimens of each sample are placed inside the reactor in a 300 ml vessel fully in contact with the solid Na After the corrosion test, the three specimens are visually inspected, weighted in the same balance and observed in the appropriate microscope. Corrosion processes that go further than the surface level can be identified by both microscopes. Therefore, vessel materials that are not appropriate can be identified. Also, TCM characterisation after corrosion tests should be performed (i.e. XRD) to identify the reaction process of the TCM and other possible chemicals. On the other hand, previous tests were performed to ensure vacuum tightness in the reactor and to check the start-up of the reactor as well as to conduct it to established steady state conditions. Then, tests with only TCM have to be conducted to see the behaviour of the TCM without possible products from corrosion reaction. The methodology to evaluate corrosion is based on ASTM Corrosion rate CR (mg/cm A promising TCM, mainly seeking high energy density, has been selected to test and validate the new experimental setup. Sodium sulphide and water pair (Na The purchased sodium sulphide nonahydrate (Na The reaction from nonahydrate to pentahydrate accomplishes the requirement for building applications, a reaction temperature below 100–150 °C achievable by solar collectors and promising net enthalpy values, as shown in The reactor operating conditions, which are given by the TCM reaction itself The absorption and release of energy coming from the TCM reaction take place in reactors. Therefore, heat transfer is needed to be promoted from the TCM to the heat transfer fluid, usually water for building applications. In that sense prototypes are being made of high conductivity metals, such as copper, aluminium, or even stainless steel 316. It is known that there are several materials to be avoided in contact with Na In this paper single metals under study are stainless steel 316 and copper. Moreover, coatings are considered to protect copper and aluminium from Na Halar® is an organic coating that is mainly composed by Ethylene Chloro Trifluoroethylene (ECTFE). At temperatures up to 120 °C the polymer is neither affected by stress cracking nor attacked by the majority of chemical reagents. ECTFE is resistant to most chemicals except chlorinated solvents and has better barrier properties to SO Electroless autocatalytic Nickel-Phosphorus Coatings, from now on electroless nickel, are alloys of nickel and phosphorus produced by autocatalytic chemical reduction with hypophosphite and generally deposited from acid solutions operating at high temperatures. These coatings have multifunctional properties, such as hardness, heat hardenability, abrasion, wear and corrosion resistance, magnetics, electrical conductivity that provides diffusion barrier, and solderability Obtained results from the corrosion test performed to the abovementioned specimen are gathered and shown by, first, single metal specimens, which are copper and stainless steel 316, and second by the coated specimen. Corrosion signs were clearly observed in copper specimens, as it can be seen in The microscopic section images of the specimen ( Corrosion rates (CR) are listed in Stainless steel 316 did not show corrosion signs after the test. Specimens have the same appearance as before testing. There are not corrosion effects on the surface. Moreover, microscopic images (see Corrosion rate values are shown in Stainless steel 316 is a potential candidate as it has been experimentally tested under the real operating conditions, and the results recommend it for long-term service; nevertheless there are also other aspects to take into account when selecting a material vessel to build up a heat exchanger or a reactor. Heat transfer should not be limiting in a TCM reactor since then thermal power output of the reactor/heat exchanger would be lower than expected. Since a coating layer represents an additional thermal resistance in the heat transfer during reaction, experiments are suggested to be carried out to reveal to which extent the thermal performance of the heat exchanger is decreased by the coating.  SEM images revealed that the coating thickness remains constant and is exactly the same (around 190–200 µm) as it is observed in   SEM images revealed that the coating size is exactly the same (around 150 µm) as it is observed in Results of SEM images of aluminium specimens coated with nickel can be seen in X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on the TCM after the corrosion vacuum test. This technique shows the crystalline phases that composed the samples. Therefore, the XRD spectrum identifies the crystalline sample components. However, it does not discern the main component, neither quantifies each detected substance. Here, the aim is to corroborate that the reaction from the nonahydrate to the pentahydrate has taken place when performing the vacuum tests. This would imply the appearance of the pentahydrate characteristic peaks in the XRD results. The XRD spectrum shows that there are three main crystalline substances in this sample: Na A setup composed by a 5 L glass jacketed reactor, evaporator, and a vacuum pump has been developed at lab scale to test corrosion of thermochemical materials under different atmospheres and a wide range of pressure and temperature. A new methodology to perform these tests has been designed, explained in detailed, tested and validated. One TCM pair, Na From the screening corrosion vacuum tests performed with the TCM reaction from the nonahydrate to the pentahydrate sodium sulphide, it can be concluded that copper is not recommended to contain Na Two coatings have been tested when applied onto copper and aluminium, two metals highly used for the manufacturing of TCM heat exchangers. Halar coating results make it a potential candidate to be selected to protect heat exchangers/reactor that may contain Na Moreover, further tests are suggested to carry out to ensure that the materials that do not present corrosion can resist for longer periods. Also, heat transfer coefficient should be measured with the selected metal or coated metal to ensure that heat transfer is not the limiting step in the reactor. The research leading to these results has received funding from the