Calcium looping is an emerging CO2 capture technology in which CO2 is captured at high temperature using a calcium-based sorbent, which however suffers from a well-known problem of loss-in-capacity after a few cycles. Water hydration is a potential method that can be applied to reactivate the sorbent on-site. The present work confirmed the effectiveness of periodic water hydration on the reactivation of a limestone and a synthetic CaO/cement sorbent. Furthermore, it was found that the water hydration of calcined limestone was independent of the factors, such as particle size, hydration duration, hydration temperature, and pre-calcination temperature. Also the conversion of hydrated limestone cannot be further enhanced by ultrasonic hydration. In contrast, the synthetic CaO/cement sorbent showed strong dependence on those factors. In addition, the CaO conversion of the synthetic CaO/cement sorbent can be recovered to more than 80% by ultrasonic hydration.For nearly a decade the calcium looping process that employs the reversible reaction between CaO and CO Hydration in steam or liquid water is such a promising technique that could effectively recover the chemical activity of CaO in practice. Steam hydration has been extensively studied and can be applied during carbonation Whilst water hydration was employed to reactivate the partially sulphated CaO for SO Two types of calcium-based sorbents, namely natural limestone and synthetic sorbent were chosen for this study. The natural limestone was purchased from AGRICOLA Mining Pty Ltd., Australia while synthetic sorbent was produced from Ca(OH) An Eagle III micro-XRF elemental analyzer was used to determine the CaO content in the calcium-based sorbent with different particle size. The real CaO content in synthetic sorbent was obtained by taking into account the formation of Ca The sample morphologies were observed with a Jeol JSM-6610 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with accelerating voltage of 20 The chemical compositions of calcium-based sorbent after various treatments were identified in a Bruker AXS D8 Advance X-ray Diffractometer equipped with a scintillation counter, graphite monochromators and copper target. The XRD analysis was conducted at room temperature (25 The calcium-based sorbent with different particle size was hydrated with excessive water (the mass ratio of sorbent to water was 1:20) in a beaker, which was placed on a hot plate and kept stirring during the hydration period. After specified duration of hydration at a certain temperature, the wet sorbent was filtered using a vacuum pump and subsequently dried in an oven at 110 A Cahn-131 Thermo-gravimetric analyzer (TGA) was used to measure conversion of CaO in the calcium-based sorbent after water hydration. To minimize the influence of mass transfer, in every run about 20 Note that the conversion in this work means the utilization degree of free CaO to CaCO The conversions of HL(106–150 Overall, HS(150–250 Water hydration has been extensively studied to reactivate the spent fluidized bed combustor (FBC) ash that mainly contains partially sulphated CaO to remove SO For the water hydration of calcined limestone, Ca(OH) The effects of 5 particle sizes (<75–>250 In contrast, the hydration of synthetic CaO/cement sorbent proceeded at a much slower rate than limestone. For instance, after 60 s hydration in water, HS(150–250 Overall, on average about 15% higher conversion for hydrated limestone than that of hydrated synthetic sorbent was observed. The only difference between limestone and synthetic CaO/cement sorbent lies in the presence of cement in synthetic sorbent, hydration of which is a very complex process involving the reactions between calcium aluminate, calcium oxide, silicon dioxide and water. As shown in the XRD results from  It is also clearly seen that the difference in reaction rate of chemical-controlled stage contributes to the difference in CaO conversion of HL(106–150 Severe calcination temperature would enhance the sintering of calcium oxide As discussed above, the hydration of calcined limestone was rapid enough to complete in minutes while the hydration of synthetic CaO/cement sorbent showed relatively slow hydration rate. The reason for the slow hydration rate of synthetic CaO/cement sorbent is envisaged to be the formation of hydrates of cement that enhances the diffusion resistance of water molecule to fresh CaO and/or the nucleation of hydraulic products of C12A7 that encompasses fresh CaO. If this explanation is true, enhancing the diffusion of water molecule would be able to improve the effectiveness of water hydration on synthetic CaO/cement sorbent. To this end, an ultrasonic bath was employed to enhance the effect of water hydration on synthetic sorbent. Ultrasonic hydration was conducted by submerging the sample in the ultrasonic bath at room temperature for 6 The feasibility of ultrasonic hydration in industrial application has been assessed by Anthony et al. Water hydration is effective to reactivate the activities of a calcined limestone and a synthetic CaO/cement sorbent that have lost their activities during cyclic carbonation/calcination reactions. The calcined limestone hydrated in water for 1 The authors are grateful to the financial support of the Department of Resources, Energy, and Tourism under the Australia–China Joint Coordination Group on Clean Coal Technology Grant Scheme. The authors also thank Ms. Yan Zheng for operating the X-ray Fluorescence.