Two methods including roasting-water leaching and direct acid leaching, were comparatively studied for the extraction of rubidium from the rubidium-bearing biotite. The leaching behaviors were investigated and optimized conditions were then obtained. For chlorination roasting-water leaching, the maximal rubidium extraction was obtained with a yield of 97.15% when at the mass ratio (CaCl2 versus minerals) of 0.4 and at temperature 900 °C after 10 min. For direct acid leaching, the optimized conditions for rubidium extraction were determined to be at sulfuric acid concentration of 5.52 mol/L, temperature of 80 °C, stirring speed of 250 rpm and liquid to solid ratio of 3, under the conditions of which, the extraction yield of 96.25% was obtained. Moreover, the mechanisms of reaction processes were further elucidated.Rubidium (Rb), the fourth lightest metallic element, was discovered by German chemists R.W. Bunsen and G.R. Kirchhoff through flame spectroscopy in 1861 ( In addition to the salt lake brine, rubidium mainly coexist in pegmatite minerals with lithium and cesium ( It was reported that rubidium was more difficult to extract than other alkali metals ( In the present work, the extraction of rubidium from biotite was comparatively studied between chlorination roasting–water leaching and direct acid leaching methods. The key factors affecting the extraction yield of rubidium were then explored, and the leaching kinetics were investigated for direct acid leaching as well. Moreover, the differences in the mechanisms of rubidium extraction by these two methods were clarified. About 1000 kg mineral samples, obtained from the Longchuan County in Guangdong province, were crushed and ball milled to 38–74 μm. The average chemical element composition is shown in Mineral samples and roasting chemical agents were uniformly mixed in a corundum crucible under a proportion of 0.6 (mass ratio of chemical agents to samples). The crucible containing the mixture was placed in a muffle furnace and the temperature was raised to the presetted temperature (600–900 °C). After being roasted, the sinter was ball milled. And water leaching was carried out at room temperature (25 °C) for half an hour with a liquid to solid (L/S) ratio of 3. The leaching residues were filtered and dried at 80 °C for 12 h. Eventually, the rubidium content of dried leaching residues was measured by an X-ray fluorescence spectrophotometer (XRF). The detection limit of the instrument can reach to the ppm level with an accuracy of 0.08%. The rubidium extraction yield was calculated by the following equation. Sulfuric acid solution was selected as leaching agent due to its excellent leaching performance ( The chemical element compositions of the leaching residues were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrophotometer (Panalytical Axios mAX, Netherlands). The phases of the sintered and leached residues were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu-Ka radiation. The surface morphologies of samples after being roasted and leached were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Nova Nano SEM230). Four different agents (CaSO Temperatures in the range from 600 °C to 900 °C were selected to study the effect of roasting temperature on rubidium extraction. As shown in  The mass ratio of CaCl XRD patterns of roasting product and leaching residues are shown in The compositions and surface morphologies of roasting products and leaching residues were analyzed by SEM-EDS. As shown in In industrial application, the generations of Cl Experiments were conducted under different leaching time at 80 °C and with a liquid-solid ratio of 4 mL/g. The results are shown in Under the leaching time of 60 min, the leaching efficiency rised from 58.69% to 97.24% when the sulfuric acid concentration varied from 1.84 to 7.36 mol/L. At the leaching time of 60 min, the leaching efficiencies of rubidium were 96.4% and 97.24%, when the acid concentrations were 5.52 and 7.36 mol/L, respectively. The reason for this indistinguishable phenomena may be due to the collapse of biotite structure under these acid concentrations ( The impact of temperature on rubidium extraction was examined in the range of 40–80 °C with acid concentration of 5.52 mol/L and the liquid-solid ratio of 4 mL/g. As shown in Rubidium leaching was further examined at agitation speeds in the range of 50–250 rpm. The results, as shown in Then a series of experiments were furtherly conducted with regarding to liquid to solid ratio in the range of 1–5. As observed in To further understand the reaction process of the rubidium leaching from biotite by direct attack, leaching residues were characterized by XRD ( It can be seen that the feldspar and orthoclase still existed in the leaching residues due to the excellent acid resistance of these mineral phases, similar phenomenon of which was also observed in a previous study ( In this work, the extraction of rubidium from biotite-containing minerals was comparatively studied between the methods of chlorination roasting-water leaching and direct acid leaching. Under their optimized conditions, the maximal rubidium extraction efficiencies through roasting–water leaching and direct acid leaching were 97.15% and 96.25%, respectively. Furthermore, acid leaching lixivium had lower ratio of potassium to rubidium, which would facilitate the purification of rubidium. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the