Gelatinized, solubilized/dispersed and retrograded starches were produced from normal (unmodified) corn and potato starches, and were used with sheep tail fat for sausage batters. Emulsion stability, jelly and fat separation, water holding capacity (WHC), emulsion viscosity and batter pH were determined. Penetrometer reading after cooking of the batters, and tenderness of the end-product were determined. Modified starches statistically (p
                     <0.01) affected emulsion stability and emulsion viscosity. The modification process was not significant for pH, WHC, jelly and fat separation and penetrometer values (p
                     >0.05). While type of used starch had a significant effect on jelly and fat separation (p
                     <0.05), for the other measurements it was not significant (p
                     >0.05).The increasing demand for better quality and healthy meat products has stimulated the use of new non-meat components. These non-meat components of natural or synthetic origin, known under the name of hydrocolloids or structuring additions, are introduced during processing and preservation of meat products ( Starches are multifunctional food ingredients. They have many functional applications, including adhesion, binding, emulsion stabilization, gelling, moisture retention ( Fat is one of the main components of meat sausages, along with muscle tissue and water, therefore, it has a substantial effect on emulsion stability in meat products. Sheep tail fat is a big part of Turkey animal fat production. It has been reported that 22,600 tons of tail tissue may be used as a source of fat production ( The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of modified corn and potato starch with sheep tail fat on the physicochemical properties of meat batters. Shank and brisket from a 3 to 4-year old beef animal was obtained from a commercial slaughter house in Erzurum, Turkey, and at chilled at 5 The sheep tail fat was obtained from a major local slaughter-house in Erzurum, Turkey, and the sheep tail tissue was ground once through a 3-mm plate. The tail fat was prepared by melting adipose tissue at 60 The Brabender Amylograph (model 8101, Brabender, Duisburg, Germany) was used to prepare modified starch samples with some modifications according to the method of Sausages were formulated with 14% protein, 19% fat, 60% moisture and 3% starch. Partially thawed lean meat was chopped for 2–3 Batters were stuffed into 85-mm diameter cellulose casings (MWF 591 stuffer, Mado Patron, Germany) and crimped (SCH 7210 poly-clip system, Gmbh & Co. KG, Germany). Sausages were heated to an internal temperature of 72 The pH of the raw batters was measured using a pH meter (Schott LabStar pH Meter, Germany) on a homogenate of 10 The procedure of The procedure of The jelly and fat separation was measured as described by Immediately after stuffing, batter viscosity was measured in triplicate with a viscometer (Poulten Selfe and Lee Ltd., England) set at 10 The depth of puncture was measured with a penetrometer (model PNR 6, Sur-Berlin, Berlin, Germany) on two surfaces of each of two links of cooked sausages. Data were analyzed as a two factor factorial analysis in a completely randomized design using the The results of variance analysis for the parameters are shown in Type of starch, starch modification and type of starch Jelly and fat separation and emulsion stability indicate hydration/binding properties, which represent the ability of the meat emulsion to retain moisture and fat during processing ( Starch modification had a significant effect on TEF%, released fat and released water, while type of starch and type of starch Modified starches decreased the amount of fat separated out ( Modified starches altered the amount of water in the TEF ( The results of the variance analysis for jelly and fat separation of the batters are shown in Although starch modification leads to statistically significant changes in viscosity, the effect of type of starch and type of starch The variance analysis results for the penetrometer values of the end product are shown in Incorporation of modified starches into a meat batter improved the emulsion stability and reduced the jelly and fat separation, probably due to the formation of a more stable complex. From the results of jelly and fat separation, we concluded that potato starch is better than corn starch for meat sausages. Although emulsion stability and jelly/fat separations are statistically not significant for gelatinized, dispersed/solubilized, and retrograded starches, the low TEF value obtained with gelatinized starch suggests that gelatinized starch is better than the other modified starches. Thus, modified starches can be successfully used to control binding properties of meat batters.