The solubility of cesium nitrate in binary solvents formed by ethanol and water was determined in the temperature range between 278.15K and 313.15K at atmospheric pressure using an isothermal method. The reliability of the measured method used in this study was checked by comparing the experimental data with published data in the literature for the CsNO3–water system, and the method proved to be accurate. Experimental solubility data were correlated with Sechenov's equation.As a basic problem and a great academic challenge in chemical and physical research, the problem of chemical and phase equilibrium can be found in almost every unit operation in the chemical engineering field. Knowledge of solubility is very essential as a support for the design and simulation of unit operations such as crystallization and solvent selection of reaction and separation process Although solubility measurement techniques are improving, they are still time- and labor-intensive. While crystallization requires a mixed solvent system, it is practically impossible to cover the full range of solvent combinations with sufficient detail to find the optimal solution. To overcome these obstacles, it is highly desirable to have a thermodynamically consistent model to correlate and predict salt solubility in pure and mixed solvent systems based on a small initial set of measured solubility data As reported by Kirk-Othmer Distilled–deionized water was used in all experiments as a part of the solvent. All the other chemicals were supplied by the Tianjin Chemical Reagent Co., China. The purity of commercial CsNO The solubility of cesium nitrate in water–ethanol solution was investigated by the isothermal method. The experiments were carried out in a thermostat. The temperature in the thermostat was maintained at constant temperature (±0.02 For proving the accuracy of the experimental method used in this study, the solubility of CsNO The measured solubility data of CsNO Generally, the solubility of CsNO The experimental solubility data were correlated with Eq. The measured solubilities and predicted solubilities with Eq. From The solubility of CsNO This work is sponsored by financial assistance from the