Our objective was to determine the role of surface charge and wettability on early stage mineralization as well as bone cell adhesion and proliferation on polarized HAp surface. To estimate the surface wettability, contact angles were measured in water, simulated body fluid (SBF) and Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/nutrient mixture F-12 Ham (DMEM). Experimental results show that HAp surface wettability and surface energy can be tailored by inducing surface charge without introducing any volumetric effects in the material. Increasing the surface charge increased the wettability and also the energy of HAp surfaces in all tested media. A maximum surface energy of 49.47±3.76mJ/m2 was estimated for positively charged HAp surfaces polarized at 400
                     oC. The in vitro bioactivity of polarized HAp samples was evaluated by soaking in SBF and DMEM (cell media). Cell–materials interaction was studied by culturing with human fetal osteoblast cells (hFOB). In vitro results show that tailoring the combined effect of wettability and charge polarity on the HAp surface enable differential binding of inorganic ions (e.g., Ca2+, Cl−, Na+, HCO3
                     − etc) and organic cell adhesive proteins (e.g., fibronectin, vitronectin etc) with different surface properties, which results in accelerated or decelerated mineralization as well as cell adhesion and proliferation on polarized HAp surface.Synthetic hydroxyapatites [HAp, Ca Much effort has recently been invested to develop HAp-based biomaterials with tailored adhesion and adsorption properties by surface modification. For this purpose, different surface modification treatments of HAp ceramics, such as electrostatic charge storage within electrically polarized HAp It has been reported that sintered hydroxyapatite compacts can be polarized by applying a d.c. electric field at elevated temperature Although several reports are available on different aspects of polarized HAp, information on wettability and surface energy of polarized HAp surface and its influence on bone like apatite growth in the simulated body fluid (SBF) and cell–materials interactions has not been researched. Our research results established that a surface with improved wettability and high surface energy favor cells attachment and proliferation Hydroxyapatite powder was synthesized in-house, by sol-gel route, using calcium nitrate tetrahydrate [Ca(NO For phase identification of sintered HAp samples, X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out with a Siemens D500 Krystalloflex X-Ray diffractometer (Siemens Corporation, NY, USA) using copper Kα radiation ( Polarization was carried out on sintered and polished HAp samples, in air, using platinum electrodes, with Keithley 6487 picoammeter (Keithley Instruments Inc., Ohio, USA) and ceramic strip heater (OMEGA Engineering Inc., Connecticut, USA). During polarization, the samples were slowly heated from room temperature to polarization temperature ( The static contact angles of sessile drops of liquids on polished samples were measured using a face contact angle set-up equipped with a camera (VCA Optima, AST Products Inc., MA, USA). Three liquids, namely deionized distilled water, simulated body fluid (SBF) at pH 7.4 and Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/nutrient mixture F-12 Ham (DMEM) (cell culture media) at pH 7.4 were used to investigate wettability of samples. For surface energy calculation two polar liquids, formamide and glycerol, and one apolar liquid, diiodomethane, were used. The liquid surface tension and their components were used in the following equation   In order to study the effect of polarization on nucleation and growth of biomimetic mineral in the presence of protein, ‘N’ poled HAp samples were immersed in cell free Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium/nutrient mixture F-12 Ham (DMEM) culture media supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and kept at 37  Cells morphology was assessed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) observation. Cultured samples for SEM observation were rinsed with 0.1 The MTT assay (Sigma Inc., St Louis, MO) was performed for 3, 5 and 11 days of incubation to determine hFOB cell proliferation on both ‘N’ poled, ‘P’ poled, and unpoled HAp surfaces. Triplicate samples per group were evaluated and three data points were measured from each sample. An MTT solution of 5 Data for contact angle, surface energy and MTT assay are presented as mean     Mineralization behavior of poled and unpoled samples after 7 days of immersion in SBF is shown in  SEM observation revealed the initial attachment, growth and spreading of hFOB cells on poled and unpoled HAp surfaces. After 3 days of cell culture ( hFOB cell proliferation on both poled and unpoled samples was studied using MTT assay. The polarization mechanism of HAp is not very well understood. Previously, high temperature monoclinic-hexagonal transformation phenomenon in HAp crystal was identified as the most probable cause for its polarization The present results show that the HAp surface wettability as well as surface energy can be changed by inducing surface charge on the surface, without imparting any volumetric effects in the material such as roughness or chemical treatment. During the polarization process, protons migrate along  To compare with SBF solution, a faster mineralization process with more pronounced and crystalline carbonated apatite layer deposition was observed in cell media within a few days of immersion. Long chain protein with high surface hydrophilicity present in cell media led to improve wettability for all HAp surfaces. It could be seen that better wettability in cell media stimulates nucleation and precipitation of apatite crystals Our results of increased surface occupancy by osteoblast cells on ‘N’ poled HAp surface is in good agreement with previous studies demonstrating enhanced osteoblast adhesion and proliferation on ‘N’ poled HAp surface In summary, a highly bioactive HAp surface with tailored adhesion and adsorption properties has been developed based on the integration of three phenomena: surface charge, wettability and surface energy. Experimental results show that HAp surface wettability can be changed by inducing surface charge via polarization. Increasing the surface charge increased the wettability and surface energy of polarized HAp surfaces in all media. Better wettability and strong electrostatic charge accumulated Ca Authors acknowledge financial support from the Office of Naval Research under the Grant No. N00014-01-05-0583.