The reduction of celestite concentrate to SrS using Al has been shown to be induced by mechanical activation. A thermodynamic appraisal showed that the reaction between SrSO4 and Al is highly exothermic and should be self-sustaining. XRD analyses showed that reaction started only after milling for an induction time of 30–35min, after induction only product peaks were present. Increasing milling time up to 60min had no significant effect other than refining the crystallite size. The aluminium product was not Al2O3 as expected but mixed phases such as Sr3Al32O51, SrAl4O7 and SrAl2O4 which were thought to be formed by an adventitious oxidation process.Ball milling induced chemical reactions and alloying have been the subjects of numerous investigations ( There are some articles about the aluminothermic reduction of strontium compounds in the literature. In nature strontium occurs most commonly as celestite, SrSO Thermodynamic calculations reveal that the Gibbs free energy change of reaction It has been shown that a reaction can be self-sustaining process, if The main goal of this article is to study the ball milling induced reduction of purified celestite concentrate by Al in order to elucidate the reaction mechanism and assess the potential for commercial application. Handpicked specimens of celestite were collected from Likak celestite mine near Yasouj, Southwest Iran. The samples were first crushed by a hammer and then ground in a laboratory type tumbling mill to reduce the particle size. The ground samples were washed with dilute HCl (1 A planetary type ball mill (Farapazhouhesh, Iran, FP2 model) was used in milling experiments. Preliminary experiments indicated that the following conditions were appropriate: 600 After finishing each milling run, the samples were leached for 2 Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded using a Philips diffractometer (Model: PHILIPS-X Pert, APD software) under following condition: radiation — Cu Kα, tube current and voltage — 30 The morphology of samples was examined using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Model: Cam Scan, MV 2300, Oxford). SEM images were recorded in secondary electron modes. The samples were dispersed in ethanol and dried in a laboratory oven at 100  The peaks for SrS (JCPDS file No. 02-0659) and Al Although SrAl The presence of strontium–aluminium oxides in the as milled samples suggests that SrO may be an intermediate phase during the reaction. However, a more probable scenario is that some of the product SrS oxidises to SrO with the air present in the milling chamber. Thermodynamic calculations using HSC Chemistry for Windows ( The mechanically induced oxidation of sulphides in air at ambient temperature has been shown to produce SO The XRD trace at 60 The presence of SrS in the product milled for more than 35 The XRD traces of 45 The effect of excess Al on the reaction The XRD traces of the hot water leached residues for these samples milled for 45 SEM micrographs of the as-milled samples are shown in The X-ray diffraction results ( Beyond 35 Mixtures of purified celestite and aluminium were dry milled in air for different times in a planetary ball mill to study the reaction between SrSO The XRD analysis showed that during reaction between Al and purified celestite in ball milled condition, some strontium–aluminium–oxide compounds such as Sr The XRD traces of 10% excess aluminium after 45 The authors gratefully acknowledge