A home-made Fe/activated carbon (Fe/AC) catalyst has been tested for the wet oxidation of phenol in a cocurrent down-flow fixed bed reactor at relatively mild conditions (100–127°C and 
                        
                           
                              P
                              
                                 
                                    O
                                    2
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     =8atm), initial pH of 3.5 and a wide range of spatial time values (20–320gCAT
                     h/gPh). Complete phenol conversion and 80% TOC removal were reached at 127°C and 320gCAT
                     h/gPh. The Fe/AC catalyst has also shown a convenient chemical stability in long-term experiments, Fe leaching being almost negligible. It has been proved that oxidation of phenol takes place on the catalyst surface via a heterogeneous mechanism, the contribution of homogeneous reaction being no significant. The oxidation intermediates have been identified, consisting of ring intermediates (p-benzoquinone, p-hydroxybenzoic and traces of hydroquinone) that are further oxidized to short chain acids (mainly maleic, malonic, acetic and formic acids). The three last showed to be highly resistant to further oxidation, these being the responsible of the TOC remaining after complete removal of phenol.acetic acid  carbon concentration in the effluent (mg carbon/L) diameter size (mm) fixed-bed reactor formic acid  hydroquinone liquid hourly space velocity (h maleic acid malonic acid oxalic acid pressure (atm) phenol flow rate (mL/min) specific surface area (m standard conditions of temperature and pressure (298 temperature (°C) total organic carbon time on stream (h) total pore volume (cm catalyst weight (g) conversion spatial time (g relative to gas stream relative to a compound relative to liquid stream relative to initial conditions Wet air oxidation (WAO) refers to the process in which the oxidation of organic and inorganic compounds in aqueous phase takes place at high temperature (up to 300 Activated carbon (AC) has been recently introduced in catalytic wet air oxidation (CWAO) When AC or other carbon materials have been employed as catalyst supports in CWAO, noble metals are usually the active phase, being Pt and Pd the most commonly used. Working temperatures varied within 180–230 AC-supported iron catalysts have been successfully tested by our group in phenol oxidation upon heterogeneous Fenton treatment This work focuses on the study of CWAO of phenol at 1000 Phenol has been selected in this work as target compound because it is frequently present in industrial wastewaters due to its widespread use in chemical processes (resins, nylon, plasticizer, antioxidants, colourings, pesticides, insecticides, explosives, biocides, etc.) and its solubility and stability in aqueous phase A hydrocarbon derived granular actived carbon supplied by Merck (Ref.: 102514) was used as catalytic support. It was sieved and the fraction of 0.5–1 A standard wet oxidation unit has been used in this work. The main component is a fixed bed reactor (FBR) consisting of a stainless steel tube of 8.5 An aqueous solution of 1000 Samples of the liquid exiting reactor were periodically taken once the steady state had been reached (which took at least 8 N  Fe leaching was always very low. The Fe concentration in the reactor off-stream never exceeded 1 To check the possible contribution of the homogeneous-phase reaction to the overall oxidation process two set of experiments were carried out at the same spatial time: 40 To learn on the stability of the Fe/AC catalyst, a long-term (9 days) experiment was carried out. The operating conditions were those reported in The same intermediate species were identified in the wet oxidation of phenol with both the Fe/AC catalyst and the AC support alone. These consisted of ring compounds, mainly The presence of  Phenol could interact with carboxylic groups from the AC surface yielding  Hydroquinone concentration in the effluent was found double with the AC alone because when Fe is present the formation of a complex between hydroquinone and Fe Looking at the short chain acids distribution curves from the Fe/AC runs, only maleic acid shows a maximum indicating that undergoes further reaction whereas the rest (malonic, acetic and formic acids) seem to be resistant to oxidation, at least under the operating conditions used in this work. These acids are the responsible of the TOC remaining after complete removal of phenol. In all the runs, TOC conversion measured and calculated from the identified species are fairly coincident indicating that the oxidation intermediates have been fully identified. The results reported in this work allow to conclude that the activity of this novel catalyst based on Fe supported on activated carbon for wet oxidation of phenol compares well with that reported in literature for other carbon-supported metallic catalyst whose active phases consist mainly in more expensive noble metals. Moreover, this Fe/AC catalyst shows a convenient chemical stability under the relatively mild operating conditions used in this work. No significant loss of activity was observed in a long-term (9 days) oxidation run, where no more than 2% of initial Fe was leached from the catalyst. Under these operating conditions, oxidative coupling of phenol and/or phenolic compounds, which may lead to species adsorbable onto the catalyst, seems to be negligible. Wet oxidation of phenol with this catalyst yields Research in course is addressed to optimize the preparation of Fe/AC catalysts for their application in catalytic oxidation treatments of real industrial wastewaters. Financial support from the Spanish MEC through the project (CTQ2004-02912/PPQ) is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thank Dr. Eloisa González for her help in catalyst characterization.