In this paper, the robust tracking control problem for uncertain singular stochastic distribution control (SDC) systems is considered. A new control target, where the distribution tracking error at each time instant satisfies a certain upper bound beyond a limited time, is proposed. This control target is different from the tracking control in the output SDC systems which makes the output probability density function (PDF) track a desired PDF as close as possible. Then an instant performance index instead of the infinite integration index is adopted, and the upper bound of this index is taken as the stability condition of a Lyapunov function to obtain a robust tracking controller via an augmentation control and linear matrix inequality (LMI). Simulations are also included to show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm and encouraging results have been obtained.Stochastic control, as one of important areas in control engineering practice, has drawn a considerable attention in the past decades. Many approaches have been developed and used in practical control systems. Examples are minimum variance control ( It is noted that some developed PDF control laws were obtained directly by using numeral optimization calculation ( As described above, the robust tracking control has been widely used in the output SDC systems design. However, it is worth pointing out that hitherto, almost all of those studies are focused on the nonsingular output SDC systems and to a certain degree, the singular systems have more convenient and natural description for practical systems ( The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The problem description is given in Section In the dynamic stochastic systems, define Due to the continuous, Taking the model uncertainty and disturbance into account, assuming  Generally, in the output SDC systems, the output PDF  In practice, the limited invariant base functions and the statistical sampling ( For the output SDC system, the tracking control is always considered. In this paper, the desired target PDF is assumed as follows,  Because of the approximation error, the accurate tracking is almost impossible to achieve. In addition, the approximation error is incompletely equivalent to the modeling error, so it is necessary to differentiate between them.  To take another angle to look at For the singular output SDC system     It is difficult to directly use For the robust tracking control in the output SDC systems, a traditional tracking error with infinite integration of the time index is always chosen as the performance index  In this definition, the reason that the performance index does not require the accumulation of tracking error less than an upper bound is that the tracking error exists all the time. In other words, the accumulation of tracking error will be out of the bound inevitably if the performance index For system The meaning of  Different from the traditional output SDC tracking control, the robust output SDC tracking control does not require that the output PDF can follow a pre-determined PDF as close as possible. Rather, it tries to achieve that the distribution tracking error is no more than a given threshold, which can be pre-determined by control requirements. This suggests that we can accurately evaluate the robust output SDC tracking control performance in terms of whether it meets the control requirement or not, and it can be also seen as an improvement for the optimal tracking of output SDC system.    A Lyapunov–Krasovskii function is chosen as follows, Pre-multiply Based on the analysis above, if the pair In fact, from the process of the proof of  The role of To illustrate the effectiveness of the proposed robust tracking algorithm, a temperature field distribution (or flame shape distribution) control system of chain coal-layer-fired boiler as shown in In the simulation, the initial output flame shape distribution is selected as Using the LMI toolbox of Matlab to solve the feasibility problem of When the robust output feedback controller is applied, the responses of dynamical weight vectors are shown in  From For the tracking control of the output SDC systems, most controller structures are state feedback controller structures, that is In this paper, a robust distribution tracking error controller of non-Gaussian uncertainty singular output SDC systems is designed. The system uncertainty and PDF approximation error are both taken into consideration. The purpose of this controller is to make the distribution tracking error at any time instant satisfy a certain upper bound beyond a limited time. For this purpose, the convex polytopic is used to describe the uncertainty and the augmentation control structure is applied to transfer the tracking problem into a robust stabilization problem. Also, an instant performance index is chosen and a feedback construction controller with the error of the output PDF and the desired PDF is given. All of those have simplified the controller design. Finally, encouraging results have been obtained by the simulation tests as well.