Mining seismicity induced by coal fractures can cause strong seismic motions in roadway and result in serious seismic hazards to mining personnel and equipment. In order to assess the seismic hazards induced by coal fractures, a deterministic methodology was proposed based on a coal fracture source model and further developed into a numerical program called Mining-induced Seismic Hazard Assessment software (MSHA). The program accepts user-input material constants of in-situ coal seam and calculates the resultant seismic motions in the roadway; the seismic motions were fully verified by a comparison between the numerical and in situ results. The methodology was further applied to assess the seismic hazards in the panel 92201 of the Sanhejian Coal Mine, the seismic hazards were characterized by the peak particle velocity (PPV) and octahedral shear stress (OSS). The results indicate that the tensile strength of coal constitutes the most significant parameter of the coal fracture source model. Moreover, a general and practical conclusion was obtained that the intensity and scope of seismic hazards in roadway are positively related to the tensile strength of coal, and the left and right sides of the roadway might encounter significant seismic damage under impact of coal fracture. The conclusion is useful for mining engineers to identify the potential seismic hazard in the roadway, and therefore make targeted strategies in mining support system.Underground excavations usually results in stress redistribution which can cause fracture initiation and propagation in coal mass. The process is accompanied by the generation of seismic waves known as mining-induced seismicity, which has already been widely noticed in underground mining and civil tunneling projects [ Seismic hazard assessment was primarily proposed in the area of earthquake engineering and has experienced significant advances in the last decades [ Seismic hazard assessment was subsequently introduced to mining engineering due to the serious impact of seismic hazards in mines. Seismic hazard assessment in mines can be generally divided into two categories: probabilistic method and deterministic method. The probabilistic method is an estimation of the mean probability (over space and time) of the occurrence of a seismic event with a certain magnitude within a given time interval; the deterministic method is the continuous evaluation of the seismic hazard as a function of seismic motions on a certain area. In the seismic hazard assessment result, the seismic hazards are usually represented in terms of values or probability distributions of accelerations, velocities, or displacements on geological structure surface [ Many countries have made significant contributions in evaluation and forecasting of the seismic hazards in mines. For example, Dębski [ In recent years, seismic hazard assessment arises extensive concern in Chinese coal mines, because many coal mines encountered serious seismic hazards induced by mining activities, especially the coal fractures in the stress concentration zone. Many innovative technology and methods were thus proposed to assess seismic hazards based on the in situ seismic data in underground coal mining, such as the passive tomography technology [ In this study, a deterministic methodology was proposed to assess the seismic hazards based on the coal fracture source model proposed in our previous work [ Seismic hazard assessment in coal mine primarily aims at the quantitative estimation of seismic motion in mining space, and it can be conducted deterministically or probabilistically [ In this study, a deterministic methodology was proposed for seismic hazard assessment of coal fracture in underground coal mine. The first step is to develop a particular seismic scenario and then determine the seismic source parameters, which can refer to the source model proposed in our previous work [ The second step is to evaluate the resultant seismic hazard in roadway, especially at some significant sites with a distance from the seismic source, and this step has also been implemented in the MSHA program. During the numerical program procedure, user was asked to input a roadway geometry model, the model was built according to the in-situ geological setting, and the material constitutive relations were determined based on the laboratory tests. The source seismic motion obtained in the first step was then applied to the roadway geometry model, and the resultant seismic motions in roadway, usually represented by motion parameters such as accelerations, velocities, and displacements, can be computed by a conventional explicit solver. The last step is to assess the final seismic hazard in the roadway, which is characterized by peak particle velocity (PPV) and octahedral shear stress (OSS) in this study. The PPV is proportional to the maximum strain for the elastic wave, and has been widely utilized to predict seismic damage and rock fragmentation [ The methodology was utilized to study the seismic hazard in Sanhejian Coal Mine located in the north of the Jiangsu province ( The panel 92201 in Sanhejian Coal Mine is one of the panels which suffered from serious seismic hazards induced by frequent coal fractures. The panel is located in the middle of the coal field at a depth of 900 m, and a normal fault, F1, exists right in the middle of the panel with a height of 0.9–10 m and an angle of 35° ( In situ coal masses were sampled from the coal seam 9# in panel 92201 and then processed uniformly through drilling, slicing, and polishing to obtain cylindrical specimens (Ø50 × 100 mm). The density of the coal samples was measured 1336 kg/m According to the methodology, a seismic scenario of coal fracture was developed in the MSHA program. The coal fracture was assumed to take place at the stress concentration zone, and the fracture type was shear fracture based on the source model proposed in our previous study [ In order to investigate the resultant seismic motions in the panel 92201, a roadway geometry model of the panel 92201 was built in the MSHA program, as shown in In order to validate the methodology, a comparison was conducted between the numerical seismic motions and the in situ seismic motions. The numerical seismic motion in the roadway was calculated using the MSHA program, and the in situ seismic motion was obtained using a seismic monitoring system. The system mainly consists of a velocity sensor, acquisition station, recorder, and cable system. The sampling rate of the sensor is 500 Hz, A/D converter is 16 bits, and the maximum data transmission rate is 19200 bit/s. The system can continuously collect the seismic motions and convert to digital signals, then transmit to the recorder through the cable system. The velocity sensor was installed on the top of the roadway in the panel 92201, and fixed at the end of anchor bolt, as shown in The collected in situ seismic motions were compared with the numerical result, as shown in The results of seismic hazard assessment in the roadway of panel 92201 were finally obtained by the MSHA program, and the seismic hazards were characterized by the peak particle velocity (PPV) and octahedral shear stress (OSS). The PPV has been commonly utilized to characterize the seismic damage and fragmentation of geo-materials, and the OSS can be used to predict the failure scope in roadway under seismic impact [ The effects of different seismic parameters on source seismic motions were investigated using the MSHA program, and the results are shown in The MSHA program was utilized to calculate the source seismic motions induced by coal fracture, the coal tensile strength ranges from 1 to 3 times the tensile strength of coal in Then the source seismic waves were further applied on the boundary of the roadway geometry, as shown in In addition, the frequency spectrum of the resultant seismic motions in the roadway was also obtained using the MSHA program, as shown in According to the methodology in this study, the seismic hazard is characterized by peak particle velocity (PPV) and octahedral shear stress (OSS). The PPV of the seismic motions in the roadway induced by coal fractures were finally determined by the MSHA program, the relationship between the PPV and the tensile strength of coal was also quantitatively analyzed, as shown in In addition, the distribution of octahedral shear stress (OSS) in the roadway was also obtained at the 1st peak ( Field observations of seismic hazards in roadway induced by coal fractures were also obtained and compared with the numerical results, as shown in In this study, a deterministic methodology was proposed for seismic hazard assessment of coal fractures in the underground coal mine. The first step of the methodology is to develop a particular seismic scenario of coal fracture in stress concentration zone, and the seismic parameters are coal density, Poisson's ratio, shear modulus, and tensile strength. The effects of seismic parameters on source seismic motions were quantitatively investigated, and the results indicate that the tensile strength constitutes the most significant parameter for the seismic scenario of coal fracture. The methodology was further developed into a numerical program called Mining-induced Seismic Hazard Assessment software (MSHA). The program accepts user-input material constants of in-situ coal seam, and calculates the resultant seismic motions in the roadway. In order to validate the methodology, a comparison was conducted between the calculated seismic motions and the in situ seismic motions obtained using a seismic monitoring system, the result shows that the calculated seismic motions agree well with the in situ seismic motions in peak particle velocity and dominant frequency. Finally, the methodology was applied to evaluate the seismic hazards in the panel 92201 of the Sanhejian Coal Mine, and the seismic hazards were characterized by the peak particle velocity (PPV) and octahedral shear stress (OSS). The results illustrate that the PPV in left and right of the roadway are significantly larger than that in the top and bottom of the roadway, and the PPV in the roadway increases with the tensile strength of coal. Comparison of the OSS under different tensile strength of coal indicates that the larger tensile strength leads to a more extensive OSS in roadway. Therefore, a general and practical conclusion was finally obtained that the intensity and scope of seismic hazards in roadway are positively related to the tensile strength of coal. What's more, field observations of the seismic hazards in roadway induced by coal fractures were obtained and compared with the numerical results, which transpire that the methodology proposed in this study is a feasible method for seismic hazard assessment in underground coal mine. Financial supports for this work, provided by the