The properties of six newly synthesized reagents for extraction of metal ions [Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II)] in chloride media were investigated, and the results with the standard extractants such as Cyanex 272, Cyanex 301, Ionquest 801 (DE2HPA) were compared. From these experimental results, a physicochemical model was developed to calculate the extraction curves of Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II). This model describes perfectly the extraction curves providing that extraction of M
                        2+ and MCl+ (M = Co
                        2+, Ni
                        2+ or Mn
                        2+) as well as saponification and aggregation of extractants (dimer and trimer formation) were taken into account. Extraction constants of M
                        2+ and MCl+ as well as speciation diagrams in the extraction solvent as a function of pH were deduced from this model.Cobalt, nickel and manganese are used in electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries and alloys manufacturing ( In our previous work ( More recently, the aggregation behaviour and the acidic dissociation of these extractants were characterized by potentiometric titration and Vapour Pressure Osmometry (VPO) in acidic chloride solution and in In the present work, a physicochemical model has been developed to calculate the extraction efficiencies of Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II) from acidic chloride media as a function of pH for the six synthesized extractants reported in The extractants reported in Cobalt(II) nitrate hexahydrate (Co(NO Feed solutions of Ni(II), Co(II) and Mn(II) at 1.17 g/L (0.02 mol L The extraction properties of the organophosphorus acids towards Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II) in acidic chloride media were evaluated by plotting the metal distribution curves (extraction efficiency %E vs. pH). Extraction efficiency was calculated as follows: In order to plot the metal-distribution curves, the pH values of the aqueous phases were adjusted by using NaOH and HCl (standard solution, Alfa Aesar). Batch experiments were conducted at 25 °C in a flask containing equal volumes of aqueous and organic phases (10 mL; V Biphasic potentiometric titrations were performed with a glass electrode (Metrohm® 913) at 25 °C under nitrogen atmosphere (inert conditions) in order to investigate extractant saponification. Sodium hydroxide (Aldrich, analytical reagent) was used as titrant and sodium perchlorate (Aldrich, analytical reagent) was used to maintain the ionic strength at 1 mol L Computer simulations were carried out on a PC with the free mathematical software Scilab© (Scilab, 1989–2005). The set of mass balance equations for the calculation of the speciation were solved by using the Powell method. Liquid-liquid extraction of Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II) from acidic aqueous media by organophosphorus cationic exchangers involves the following general equilibrium (  This difference can be explained by the change of Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II) speciation as a function of chloride concentration. Therefore, Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II) might be extracted by the cationic exchangers under the form of Co The extraction of M The low values of the slopes in The biphasic titration curves have been modelled by solving Eqs. Values of acidic constants of the extractants (K To assess the relative success of the model, a linear square regression analysis of the form: The previous model including the constants reported in  The equilibria reported in In these equations, K  By using the equilibrium constants reported in The physicochemical model has been used to calculate the speciation in the loaded and do not depend on the extractant. Concentrations of NiL It is interesting to highlight that the concentration of MnL The extraction of Co(II), Ni(II) and Mn(II) from aqueous solutions containing 1 mol L