Fractures of the proximal humerus are extremely common. While there is as yet no consensus regarding surgical management, this article discusses the rationale behind nailing and details the authors' technique.Proximal humerus fractures are very common, accounting for 5% of all fractures and they are the third most frequent fracture in the elderly. The vast majority of proximal humeral fractures are either undisplaced or minimally displaced and can be managed non-operatively with satisfactory long-term outcomes. However, surgical intervention is usually necessary for displaced fractures if a favourable outcome is to be achieved. There are several problems associated with the management of displaced proximal humerus fractures Poor bone stock in elderly patients which makes fixation difficult. Displacement of the tuberosities by the action of the rotator cuff. Comminution and consequent technical difficulty. Secondary avascular necrosis. Post-traumatic and post-surgical stiffness. Surgical treatment aims to achieve stable anatomical reduction thus permitting early mobilisation and pain-free function with sound bony union. Such an outcome is dependant on many surgical and patient factors. Surgical factors include choice of implant, meticulous technique and the experience of the surgeon. Patient factors include age, bone quality, fracture configuration, general health, functional requirements, compliance and motivation. To achieve a successful outcome requires meticulous surgical technique, minimal soft-tissue disruption, anatomical reduction and rigid fixation with the minimum of implants. In some cases perfect anatomical fixation may have to be sacrificed for stability. The operating surgeon should be aware of the various techniques available, and choose the one appropriate for the individual patient and the pattern of the fracture. In this article the authors have described their rationale and technique for intramedullary nailing. While reports of intramedullary nailing in the literature are very varied impingement syndrome backing out implant failure non- or mal-union avascular necrosis joint stiffness The main advantage intramedullary fixation is a closed reduction and consequent minimal disruption of the soft-tissue envelope. The small incision makes for less damage to the blood supply and a shorter operation time While there are many commercially available intramedullary nails their concepts for use and surgical techniques are similar. Our personal preference is currently the Stryker® T2 proximal humeral nail (T2-PHN). The operation is carried out under general anaesthetic supplemented with an interscalene brachial plexus block, which makes for lighter anaesthesia and improves post-operative pain control. Intravenous prophylactic antibiotics are administered. The patient is positioned in the beach chair position on a radiolucent operating table with their head turned to face away from the operative side. This ensures optimal unrestricted access to the shoulder. Before skin preparation and draping it is important to correctly position the image intensifier on the opposite side of the table to the operating surgeon. Then under fluoroscopic control closed reduction of the fracture is attempted by adducting the arm, and supinating the forearm while applying longitudinal traction. This manoeuvre usually reduces the fracture into an acceptable position, even in cases with severely displaced fractures. Using a marker pen the surface anatomy of the anterior and posterior acromion are delineated. Our preference is for the anterolateral Mackenzie approach to the proximal humerus ( It is important to restore the anatomical neck/shaft angle and the medial buttress. We recommend the use of grafted bank bone chips to support the medial buttress and the head fragment before suturing the tuberosities. The graft is compacted and tightly packed ensuring anatomical head alignment and support to the medial buttress. In two part fractures bone graft is usually not necessary unless there is medial comminution. The tuberosities with their rotator cuff tendon attachments [ The ideal entry point for guide pin insertion is usually on the highest point of the articular surface just medial to the sulcus of the greater tuberosity in line with the humeral anatomical axis and between 1 and 1.5 cm behind the biceps tendon. The entry point is exposed using a 1 cm longitudinal incision into supraspinatus in the same orientation as its muscle fibres. This minimal approach through well vascularized tissue minimizes rotator cuff damage. The proximal entry reamer is then introduced over the guide pin followed by the selected nail which is inserted into the medullary canal over the guide pin using gentle rotatory force directed caudally. If initial passage of the nail is tight, hand-held reamers are used to minimize the risk of iatrogenic fracture. The nail is inserted to the desired level under fluoroscopic control. Achieving an anatomic neck-shaft angle is extremely important. Varus mal-reduction is associated with a particularly poor outcome. Proximal locking is performed using the radiolucent proximal locking jig ( The nail is locked distally in dynamic mode using the jig. This prevents migration of the implant but allows a few millimetres of collapse. Then the tuberosity fragments, which have already been reduced and tied to each other, can be reinforced with further stitches through drill holes or by using the screw heads of the proximal locking screws. Reinforcement helps minimize the incidence of tuberosity displacement secondary to the pull of the rotator cuff muscles. Any previously saved fracture haematoma is then placed around the fracture site as we believe that any contained cells cytokines and growth factors etc. may help to reduce time to union and reduce the risk of non-union. Finally fluoroscopic screening is performed to assess dynamic fracture reduction and stability. This also has the advantage of confirming appropriate screw length and demonstrating that all humeral head screws are 5 mm away from the articular surface. During the wound closure the rotator cuff and deltoid are repaired. Initially the shoulder should be immobilized in internal rotation using a shoulder immobilizer for one week. However, after the first 24 h the patient is permitted to remove their arm from the immobilizer to perform gentle pendular exercises as tolerated. After one week passive assisted range-of-motion exercises are commenced followed after three weeks by active assisted exercises under physiotherapeutic supervision. In our post-operative regime there is no restriction on the range of movement but forced stretches are only permitted after six weeks. By six to eight weeks there is often excellent radiographic and clinical evidence of fracture healing.  Small superior deltoid-splitting approach permitting good access but preserving blood supply Bone grafting to the medial buttress and head Anatomical reduction of the tuberosities and their rotator cuff attachments prior to nail insertion Recessing the proximal end of the nail to preclude impingement Restoration of the anatomical neck/shaft angle avoiding valgus or varus mal-reduction Use of four proximal locking screws 5 m short of the articular surface Early post-operative mobilisation Proximal humerus fractures are an orthopaedic conundrum. They are difficult to evaluate and treat and currently there is no consensus regarding their management There have been a number of papers reporting the results of proximal humeral nailing in relatively small patient numbers. These have shown very varied results. Our re-operation and complication rates were better than most reported in the literature for both nails and plates. While the surgeon cannot influence patient factors such as age and fracture configuration, good surgical technique can help to avoid common complications. In our early cohort of patients our most common complications were impingement, followed by tuberosity non-union or mal-union. Simple technique modification to ensure that the proximal nail end was buried below the cortex reduced the rate of impingement, and robust fixation of the tuberosities using number 5 Ethibond reduced tuberosity non-union and mal-union. Careful attention to screw length and ensuring that they are 5 mm short of the articular surface reduces the risk of intra-articular screw penetration whilst ensuring adequate bone-purchase. We have previously shown that a poorer prognosis is associated with medial metaphyseal comminution. Studies of humeral nailing studies have reported violation of the rotator cuff during nail entry to be associated with post-operative shoulder pain. In our experience patients suffering from continuing post-operative pain usually respond favourably to removal of the fixation after union. Intramedullary nails allow proximal humeral fractures to be reduced and fixed through small incisions with minimal soft-tissue disruption, preservation of humeral head periosteal blood supply, reduced intra-operative blood loss and reduced operative time. Thus we believe that intramedullary nailing, in combination with suturing of the tuberosities, provides stable fixation whilst achieving minimal disruption of the soft-tissue envelope and preservation of the periosteal blood supply. This permits early motion, rehabilitation and return to function. They are not universally applicable and in elderly patients with head-splitting injuries, severe comminution or limited functional goals, early hemi-arthroplasty should be considered.