Grain size reduction due to cataclasis is a key process controlling fault frictional properties during the seismic cycle. We investigated the role of cleavage planes on fracturing and microstructural evolution during cataclasis in wet and dry carbonate fault gouges (50 wt% calcite, 50 wt% dolomite) deformed in a rotary-shear apparatus over a wide range of slip rates (30 μms−1 to 1 ms−1) and displacements (0.05–0.4 m). During shearing, progressive strain localization forms a narrow slip zone that undergoes significant frictional heating (at high slip rates), but the bulk gouge always accommodates low finite shear strains and deforms at low temperatures. Microstructural analysis of the bulk gouges indicates that deformation occurred by brittle fracturing and twinning. Microfractures in calcite are closely spaced, often exploit 
                        
                           
                              {
                              
                                 10
                                 
                                    
                                       1
                                       ¯
                                    
                                 
                                 4
                              
                              }
                           
                        
                      cleavage r-rhomb planes, and occur mainly subparallel to the expected principal stress orientation (σ1). Instead, twin planes typically occur sub-perpendicular to σ1. Electron backscatter diffraction analysis of the bulk gouges shows that calcite develops a well-defined crystallographic preferred orientation (CPO) at all investigated deformation conditions. The CPO is defined by a clustering of the calcite c-axes around an orientation sub-parallel to σ1. The calcite CPO is interpreted to result from grain rotation during granular flow, followed by brittle fracturing that occurred preferentially along calcite cleavage planes. This interpretation is supported by measurements of calcite grain shape-preferred orientations that show a population of elongate calcite grains oriented with their long axes sub-parallel to σ1. Our experimental results indicate that well-defined CPOs can form at low temperature in cataclastic fault rocks, and that mineral cleavage can strongly influence the evolution of grain sizes and shapes during comminution.Gouges and cataclasites are among the most common fault rocks in the upper crust ( Natural fault gouges and cataclasites are often composed of minerals that have well-defined cleavage planes, along which fracturing can occur preferentially. The anisotropy represented by cleavage planes is an intrinsic property of carbonates, phyllosilicates, feldspars and amphiboles (e.g., The synthetic gouges were composed of a mixture of 50 wt% calcite and 50 wt% dolomite ( The EBSD analysis was carried out on polished thin sections cut perpendicular to the gouge layer boundaries and parallel to the slip vector (i.e., tangential cuts, inset in Cleaning and processing of EBSD data were carried out using the MTEX toolbox in MATLAB ( Grains were reconstructed from processed orientation data following the procedure described by Fracture and twin orientation analysis was performed on band contrast maps collected during EBSD analysis. Fractures and twin planes were manually identified and their orientations plotted on rose diagrams. Grain shape analysis was performed on SEM backscatter electron images acquired from the same areas as EBSD analysis. Processing of SEM images, grain detection, and measurements were performed in Image SXM ( The mechanical behavior of the calcite-dolomite gouges is consistent with previous studies (e.g., Under water-dampened conditions at slip rates ≤ 0.1 ms During sample assembly and prior to shearing, the gouge layers were subjected to 17.5 MPa normal stress (i.e., uniaxial compression). For a sample that experienced only uniaxial compression for 300 s (referred to below as uniaxial stress experiment, or Under uniaxial stress conditions, twinning in calcite was uncommon and the overall twin density was in the range of 45 ± 23 mm In deformed gouges, twin planes in calcite were preferentially orientated c. 30–50° counterclockwise to the gouge layer boundaries ( After application of uniaxial stress, calcite grains with an aspect ratio ≥ 1.5 show a shape preferred orientation (SPO) consisting of a population of grains oriented with their long axes around c. 90°–110° counterclockwise from the gouge layer boundaries, sub-parallel to the applied normal load ( As a reference material for the sheared gouges, we measured the CPO of the water-dampened uniaxial stress experiment (experiment At all investigated conditions, calcite grains show a CPO characterized by a prominent cluster of the c-axes (i.e., In both water-dampened and room-humidity conditions, dolomite grains developed CPOs (max m.u.d. range 1.5–2.4) in which the c-axes create one or more clusters with different orientations. Only in experiment The EBSD analysis conducted on pure calcite gouges (experiment Experiments Misorientation angle distribution analysis of the sheared gouges showed deviations for neighbor- and random-pair grains from the distribution expected for a uniform CPO ( Finally, Temperature variations during deformation in the gouge were measured at an acquisition rate of 2.5 Hz using four K-type thermocouples (Nickel-Alumel) installed on the stationary side of the gouge holder. In particular, one thermocouple was positioned at a distance of c. 200 μm from one of the gouge layer boundaries ( Thermal modelling was performed to estimate the temperature rise in the bulk gouge as a result of heat diffusing (i.e., The model is likely to provide an upper bound on the temperature profile present in the gouge layers for the following reasons: Modelling was performed for experiment The gouge was assumed to be made of pure calcite with no porosity. The presence of pores in the gouge would significantly decrease the thermal diffusivity. The principal slip zone was assumed to be 160 μm thick, whereas microstructural evidence suggests that at high slip rates it is probably < 50 μm thick. This means that in our thermal model the heat generated was approximately three times the expected heat. The evolution of the modeled temperatures in experiment To better investigate the thermal history of the gouge in the first 4–5 cm of slip (hence in the moment during which the CPO is developing) during shearing at 1 ms The thermal model presented in Crystallographic preferred orientations (CPOs) are most commonly used to constrain deformation and recrystallization processes in mylonites (e.g., Recently, CPOs have been reported from the fine-grained slip zones of calcite-dominated faults exhumed from shallow (< 2 km) crustal depths (e.g., In the present study, EBSD analysis was focused on the bulk calcite-dolomite gouges ( The formation of a CPO in the experiments with 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2 m of slip ( We interpret the development of a calcite CPO in the bulk gouges to result from mechanical grain rotation and fracturing of calcite mainly along the As shearing initiates in the gouge layers, some calcite grains will rotate until their c-axes lie sub-parallel to the principal stress ( The weaker CPO observed in water-dampened experiments ( The stronger CPO in calcite compared to dolomite could be explained by a lower fracture energy required for crack propagation in calcite. This results in more pervasive fracturing within calcite grains ( Natural fault gouges and deformation bands are commonly composed of minerals with well-defined cleavage planes (e.g. carbonates, phyllosilicates, amphiboles and feldspars; Calcite-dolomite gouges deformed experimentally at a range of conditions developed well-defined calcite CPOs during low-temperature cataclasis. The formation of a CPO is interpreted to relate to grain rotation and pervasive fracturing of calcite that occurs preferentially along MD, ES and GDT were supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at