Fractures of the medial end of the clavicle are the least common type of clavicle fracture. We report a 29-year-old military parachutist who presented with medial end clavicle fracture after a bad landing. He was first treated non-operatively in a tertiary center and was then referred to our center by his general practitioner. Surgery was indicated since the fracture was displaced and the patient needed anatomical reconstruction to promote rapid bone healing and a prompt return to work. The medial fragment being comminuted, K-wires were used for internal fixation instead of a plate. The two K-wires were bent 180° to avoid risk of migration and were removed 3 months after surgery when the patient had begun to perform all activities without pain. Aggressive treatment is recommended for medial end clavicle fracture in case of displacement and facilitates rapid functional recovery, notably in patients with considerable clavicular demand.Medial end clavicle fracture is rare, at no more than 10% of clavicle fractures as a whole, according to published series We report a case of medial end clavicle fracture sustained by a parachutist on landing. A 29-year-old military parachutist, right-handed, with no particular medical history, experienced sudden right shoulder pain on landing after a normal training jump. At first, he took this to be a simple pain following a bad landing; however, it progressively worsened and became severe under right upper limb motion. He was admitted to the nearest hospital, where clinical examination found intense pain on palpation of the clavicle. X-ray found a displaced right medial end fracture with a distal fragment lowered with respect to the proximal fragment, without contact between the two extremities ( Medial end clavicle fracture is rare and little referred to in the literature. The etiology found in the present case has seldom been mentioned. The most frequent lesions following parachute jumps are to the ankle Management of medial end clavicle fracture is usually conservative, but there were several reports of pain and subjective impairment persisting long after trauma Medial end clavicular fracture is rare and generally due to a motorcycle accident; it can also be caused by parachute landing, without associated multiple trauma. It is often overlooked due to insufficient plain X-ray, and CT examination is essential for classifying fractures, determining joint involvement, assessing fragment displacement and measuring the proximity of any vascular axes. In case of displacement, treatment should be surgical, comprising reduction and osteosynthesis, particularly in professional parachutists. K-wire stabilization may be useful in case of comminution, but the procedure must be strictly rigorous, bending the wires back 180° to avoid secondary migration. The wires should be removed once clinical and radiological consolidation has been achieved. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.