Back on duty at the Exhibit booth of the Center for Powder Metallurgy Technology during POWDERMET2016 in Boston after being presented with the MPIF's most prestigious personal award, the Kempton H. Roll PM Lifetime Achievement Award, William (Bill) Jandeska was as genial as ever in agreeing to be interviewed for this profile article. Chicago-born William Jandeska ( I got into PM through my early years at GM Research, where I started off with super-alloys for a gas turbine project. I then migrated into ceramics, which of course were powders. From that I got involved in the need for small, strong [electric] motors and the magnetics area, with samarium-cobalt super-magnets. Then there was the gasoline crisis in the seventies, and the need to reduce the sintering temperatures for [GM's] Delco Remy furnaces, and actually that was my real start in PM. I had several patents in that area, and from there my interest kept on growing. I got involved with MPIF/APMI in 1984 when I gave a paper at the Toronto Conference and in 1986 was appointed to join the MPIF Technical Board. As indicated, I worked on a variety of projects at GM Research and in 1986 started the PM Creativity Team with Purchasing. After spending 20 years at GM Research, I then transferred to the GM Powertrain headquarters. I was on the advisory team for the launching of the powder-forged connecting rod in 1992 and I worked with Zenith on the PM bearing cap, and it just went on from there. I stayed with the Powertrain Group until I retired from GM in 2006. Yes [as President of Midwest Metallurgical Ltd]. Also, since the late 1980s, I have been involved with the MPIF's Center for Powder Metallurgy Technology (CPMT), initially working with Arlan Clayton when the CPMT was being launched, later as president in 2000–2002, and then when Howard Sanderow passed away, I took over as Project Manager. Earlier in my career, I was heavily involved with the Detroit Chapter of ASM International, and received the Young Member of the Year Award in 1976, and was elected Fellow of ASM International in 1993. I also served on the SAE PM committee and received the McFarland Award in 1993, but it has been mostly MPIF/APMI since the 1980s. For example, I served as program co-chair for the 1989 PM Conference and also for the 2002 World Congress on PM and Particulate Materials. There have been so many [particularly related to automotive]: Powder-forging, going all the way back to Buick's developments in the late 1960s; PM bearing caps; aluminum cam caps was a big one, getting the sintered dimensions right; the PM assembled cam shaft; the use of laser deposits for valve seat applications; in the magnetics area: super-magnets for small, efficient, electric motors. Most of these I was personally involved in. The main trend now is: “do more with less” – as in light-weight PM developments. There is much [new] technology evolving, for example, having a low-cost material for most of the part, and the performance material where you need it. I am on the board for a seniors center, the Older Persons Commission, in Rochester, MI. This large center is a benchmark organization and facility in the US. With a $6 million budget, it provides all sorts of services for seniors: exercises at all levels; arts and crafts, senior care, and meals-on-wheels (serving about 25,000 seniors in three communities in the Oakland county area). My wife Jean and I love the outdoors: we go hiking all the time, also biking, and traveling around exploring the Midwest and the West in our small RV. I had quite a career in boating over a 22-year period – both sail and ice-boating, but gave that up to go RV-ing. Golf is a minor interest for me, but Jean loves it. We travel overseas every year, for example, our next trip in October this year will be a river cruise from Amsterdam to Basel, Switzerland, with our wine club colleagues, enjoying wines of the Rhine and Moselle valleys and the Alsace. 