Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), a pleiotropic heritable disorder, is characterized by ectopic mineralization of the connective tissues. This disease is caused by mutations in the 
                        ABCC6
                      gene, which is expressed primarily in the baso-lateral surface of hepatocytes, and 
                        Abcc6
                     
                     −/− mice develop progressive mineralization mimicking human PXE. To investigate the hypothesis that PXE is a metabolic disorder, potentially caused by the absence of antimineralization factor(s) in circulation, we used parabiotic pairing, ie, surgical joining of two mice, to create a shared circulation between various 
                        Abcc6
                      genotypic mice. To prevent immune reaction between the parabiotic animals, all mice were bred to be 
                        Rag1
                     
                     −/−. Shared circulation between the parabiotic animals was confirmed by Evans blue dye injection and by quantitative PCR of blood cell genotypes. Pairing of 
                        Abcc6
                     
                     −/− mice with their wild-type counterparts halted the connective tissue mineralization in the knockout mice. Homogenetic wild-type and heterozygous pairings serving as controls were phenotypically unaffected by parabiosis. Consequently, the observations on the parabiotic mice support the notion that PXE is a metabolic disease, potentially due to absence of systemic antimineralization factor(s). These observations suggest that reintroduction of the critical antimineralization factors into circulation could provide a potential treatment for this, currently intractable, disease.Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a multisystem heritable disorder characterized by ectopic mineralization of peripheral connective tissues, with cardinal clinical manifestations in the skin, the eyes, and the cardiovascular system. PXE is caused by mutations in the To examine the “metabolic hypothesis” in the context of PXE, we have developed an innovative animal model system based on parabiotic pairing of We first developed immunodeficient We generated an immuodeficient PXE mouse by cross-breeding the traditional The experiments were initiated when the mice were 4 weeks of age. Three groups of mice were formed, all on Parabiotic surgery was performed in a laminar-flow hood by using sterile procedures. General anesthesia was accomplished with isoflurane delivered by a precision vaporizer. Mice were surgically joined following the previously published protocol. To ensure the animals’ well-being, individual parabiotic pairs were placed in clean cages with food pellets provided on the floor to minimize the strain of reaching for food while adjusting to parabiotic existence. Also, the mice were provided with cotton squares construct nests to keep warm. After the suturing procedure, the mice were monitored daily for 3 days for signs of pain and distress according to Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee guidelines. If the animals showed any sign of pain or distress, such as shaking, lethargy, chewing of tail and/or legs, arched back, and/or unkept grooming, then they were administered an additional dose of 0.3 mg/ml of Buprenex at 0.4 mg to 0.6 mg per kilogram body weight to alleviate the pain as needed. After the first week postoperatively the animals were monitored weekly for signs of pain and distress. The tail tissues were harvested before surgery, the blood samples were collected at different time points after surgery, and single-cell primary hepatocyte suspensions were obtained 8 weeks after surgery for genomic DNA isolation. Genomic PCR of different tissues or quantitative PCR of blood cell genotypes was performed with three primers designed for amplification of the KO (320-bp), wild-type (430-bp), or both alleles of Established shared blood circulation was also determined by injecting Evans blue dye. The organs or biopsies of muzzle skin were fixed in 10% phosphate-buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned (5 μm), and stained with H&E, Alizarin Red, or von Kossa by using standard methods for histopathological analyses. Computerized morphometric analysis of H&E-stained sections of muzzle skin was performed as described elsewhere. Muzzle skin biopsies were obtained with 6-mm biopsy punch and embedded in paraffin. Paraffin sections (10 μm) from the center of the biopsies were deparaffinized and decalcified with 0.6 N HCl for 2 weeks. The Human aortic smooth muscle cells (Cascade Biologics, Portland, OR) were routinely cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium normal growth medium. At ∼80% confluence, the cells were switched to calcification-inducing medium (Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium supplemented with 2 mmol/L Pi) in the presence of 10% mouse serum from different paired Results are given as mean ± SE. The data were analyzed by using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by the Wilcoxon Comparison test for the pairwise analyses. To develop a mouse model system for parabiotic experimentation, we used previously developed To ensure that the immune-deficient background of the The The formation of shared blood circulation between the parabiotic animals was tested by injection of Evans blue dye to the tail vein of one of the mice in parabiosis at 7 weeks postsurgically. The shared circulation was also demonstrated by examination of the genomic DNA of blood cells in paired mice at 1, 3, and 4 weeks after parabiotic surgery. Three pairs of mice ( We subsequently examined the degree of mineralization in KO mice paired with another To examine the direct effects of circulatory factors on the mineralization process in the KO mice in parabiotic pairings, we used an The Parabiotic pairing of mice was performed at 4 weeks of age, at the time of weaning, and just before histologically detectable mineralization in the vibrissae of the KO mice takes place, ie, at or around 5 to 6 weeks of age. Histopathological observations of the mineralization process confirmed that KO mice, when paired with wild-type mice, developed much less mineralization than the KO mice in KO+KO pairs. In the latter mice, the mineralization was progressive, similar to The observations on PXE by using the parabiotic model system may have relevance to understanding of the pathomechanisms of more common mineralization disorders, such as arteriosclerosis, and similar mechanisms may be operative in these systemic disorders as well. Although the molecules being transported by ABCC6 from the liver to the circulation We thank GianPaolo Guercio for assistance in article preparation. We also thank Adekemi Akingboye for assistance.