Intense selection among broilers, especially for performance and carcass traits, currently favors locomotion problems and bone resistance. Conducting studies relating to development and growth of bone tissue in broilers is necessary to minimize losses. Thus, genetic parameters were estimated for a broiler population's phenotypic traits such as BW at 42 d of age (BW42), chilled femur weight (CFW) and its yield (CFY), and femur measurements: calcium, DM, magnesium, phosphorus, and zinc content; breaking strength; rigidity; length; and thickness. Variance components were estimated through multitrait analyses using the restricted maximum likelihood method. The model included a fixed group effect (sex and hatch) and additive and residual genetic random effects. The heritability estimates we obtained ranged from 0.10 ± 0.05 to 0.50 ± 0.08 for chilled femur yield and BW42, respectively, and indicated that the traits can respond to the selection process, except for CFY, which presented low-magnitude heritability coefficients. Genetic correlation estimates between breaking strength, rigidity, and traits related to mineral content indicated that selection that aims to improve the breaking strength resistance of the femur is highly correlated with mineral content. Given the genetic correlation estimates between BW42 and minerals, it is suggested that in this population, selection for BW42 can be performed with greater intensity without affecting femoral integrity.The competitiveness of broiler lineages has resulted from intense selection for body performance and carcass traits. However, selection that has favored rapid growth among these broilers has also caused locomotion problems and reduced bone resistance. Skeletal disorders occur because the skeletal system is not supporting the increased BW (Julian, The study used the database of the reference population of broilers called TT from the Poultry Breeding program of Embrapa Swine and Poultry in Concordia, SC, Brazil. The TT reference population originated from the expansion of a paternal broiler line called TT by mating 20 males with 92 females (1:5) in 5 hatches that produced approx. 1,500 progenies, used in this study. The birds were kept in pens until 35 d of age, and from 35 to 41 d, they were housed in individual cages to evaluate feed conversion. The animals were tagged with metal rings for pedigree control. Feeding management consisted of an initial ration from 1 to 21 d (21% CP and 3,150 kcal ME), a growth ration from 22 to 34 d (20% CP and 3,200 kcal ME), and a final ration from 35 to 41 d (18.5% CP and 3,200 kcal ME). At 42 d, 1,453 birds were slaughtered after fasting for 6 h, and femoral bones were collected, weighed, and stored in a freezer at –20ºC. This material was measured to assess bone structure traits. The following phenotypic traits were evaluated: BW at 42 d of age ( To evaluate femur traits, the broilers’ femurs were subjected to a temperature of 0°C for 24 h; en the remaining flesh, fat, and cartilage were manually removed; and the bones were evaluated in relation to their moist weight, length between extremities, and thickness in the middle area. After these measurements were made, the femurs were placed in plastic bags, labeled, and stored at –20°C. Femurs were kept at 0°C for 48 h and then left at room temperature for approx. an hour to determine flexural strength. The bending test was performed on a TA-XTPlus Texture Analyzer (Texture Technologies Corporation, Hamilton, MA, USA), using the probe 3-point bending rig (HDP/3PB), HDP/90 platform, and 50 kg load cell. The probe touched the sample with a programmed weight force (trigger force) of 5 kg. This force was applied to the central area (diaphysis) to determine the flexural strength and rupture modulus. After breaking, the femoral fragments were placed in plastic bags, labeled, and stored at 0°C for 24 h to determine DM and ash. To determine DM percent, the femur fragments that had been stored at 0°C were placed at room temperature for approx. an hour. Subsequently, they were placed in preweighed porcelain crucibles, kept in an oven at 105°C for 16 h, placed in a desiccator until they reached room temperature, and weighed. The DM percent was determined as the ratio of the dry over the wet sample weights. Using the bone fragments, ash was determined immediately after obtaining the DM. The samples were incinerated in a muffle for 6 h. The initial temperature was 350°C for an hour and increased gradually to 450°C for an hour and then 550°C for an hour too, and finally, to 600°C for 3 h. Next, the crucibles with the samples were left in the desiccator until they reached room temperature and then weighed. The ash percent was determined by dividing ash and dry sample weights. To determine the mineral content, the mineral residue obtained previously from the samples was analyzed. The acid solubilization was made in Anton-Paar Microwave 3000 (Graz, Austria) fitted with a 48MF50 rotor and M50 pressure/temperature sensor accessory following the equipment manufacturer's recommendations. Initially, a 0.1 g (±0.0001) sample was weighed in a 50 mL perfluoroalkoxy (PFA) liners, to which was added 6 mL HCl ( The environmental effects considered in the genetic analysis model were studied through the least squares method. The group effect (sex and hatch) was significant ( The animal model proposed for the multitrait analyses was: High phenotypic variation in the traits studied was observed through the descriptive statistics (Table The physical traits of the femur were studied by Applegate and Lilburn ( The heritability estimates obtained (Table According to Zhong et al. ( FEMBS is a paramount trait because not only does it present an active genetic component sufficient to respond to selection (Table The present study found no evidence that selection for body weight at 42 d of age would lead to mineralization differences in femoral constituent and morphometric traits in this population. Selecting for breaking strength and rigidity instead will result in higher femoral mineral content and consequently animals that are more resistant to bone disorders. Financial supports were provided by Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation Swine and Poultry (EMBRAPA) and National Counsel of Technological and Scientific Development (CNPq). S.B. Ramos was supported by fellowship from Coordination for the Improvement of Higher Education Personnel (CAPES). N.V. Grupioni was supported by fellowship from CAPES/EMBRAPA. N.B. Stafuzza and V.A.R. Cruz were supported by postdoctoral fellowship from CNPq. R.P.S. was supported by fellowship from São Paulo Research Foundation (FAPESP). D.P. Munari was supported by productivity research fellowship from CNPq.  Supplementary data is available at PSA 