The objective of this experiment was to quantify the response of dairy cows fed a total mixed ration (TMR) to increasing access to high-quality temperate fresh forage with respect to energy intake, rumen fermentation, microbial protein flow, passage rate, nutrient digestion and utilization, and metabolic and endocrine profiles. Nine Holstein cows fed a TMR were assigned to the following treatments according to a 3×3 Latin square replicated 3 times with 20-d periods and sampling on the last 10 d of each period: 0 (T0), 4 (T4), or 8 (T8) h of daily access to fresh forage. The forage (Lolium multiflorum; 17.1% crude protein, 26.5% acid detergent fiber) was cut daily and offered ad libitum beginning at 0800h, and a TMR (16.1% crude protein, 22.9% acid detergent fiber) was offered ad libitum during the remaining time. Energy intake and balance were higher in T0 than in T8, which was reflected in higher blood glucose and insulin concentrations in T0. Total volatile fatty acid concentrations in the rumen were higher in T0 and T4 than in T8, pH was lower in T4 than in T8, and ammonia-N was higher in T0 than in T8. No differences among treatments were detected in microbial protein flow to the duodenum, digestibility of nutrients, apparent efficiency of energy, or N utilization for milk production, but the total mean retention time of feed in the digestive tract was higher in T8 than in T0. It is concluded that more than 4h of daily access to high-quality fresh forage in the diet of dairy cows fed a TMR reduced energy intake and balance but had no effects on nutrient digestion or utilization.Recently, interest has been renewed in the utilization of fresh forage ( Part of the observed differences in milk yield between these feeding systems may be related to differences in nutrient intake, which has been reported to be higher in TMR-fed cows than in grazing cows ( The design of optimal feeding strategies requires a better understanding of the digestive and metabolic responses of cows when offered diets that combine a TMR and FF. However, to date there is a paucity of published information on key aspects that affect in vivo nutrient digestion such as the dynamics of rumen fermentation, digesta passage rate, and microbial protein flow to the duodenum, as well as on associated metabolic indices of energy and protein status. Therefore, to gain insight on the formulation of diets that combine FF and TMR and maximize nutrient availability to the animal, the objective of this experiment was to determine the changes in energy intake, rumen fermentation, nutrient digestion and utilization, and metabolic and endocrine profiles of TMR-fed lactating cows with varying degrees of access to high-quality FF. The experiment complied with regulations set by the Bioethics Committee of the Veterinary Faculty (Universidad de la República, Uruguay). Nine multiparous Holstein cows fitted with permanent rumen catheters, and with a milk yield record during the previous 305 d of lactation of 7,079 Cows were housed in individual tie stalls (2.0 Samples of TMR and FF were taken at 0800, 1200, and 1600 Daily energy balance ( Apparent total-tract nutrient digestibility as described by Passage rate of large particles was estimated using Cr-mordanted NDF. The Cr-mordanted NDF was prepared from alfalfa hay according to On d 19 of each period, samples of ruminal fluid were taken hourly for 24 consecutive hours. Ruminal fluid was pressed through 2 layers of cheesecloth and pH was immediately measured using a digital pH meter (EW-05991–36, Cole Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL). A 10-mL sample of ruminal fluid was preserved with 0.2 On d 12 and 13 of each period, 2 spot urine samples were collected from all cows at 0200 and 1400 On d 10 of each period, individual blood samples were collected by jugular venipuncture at h 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 into tubes without anticoagulants. Tubes were left at room temperature for 2 All data were analyzed using SAS software version 9.1 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Energy intake and NE Rumen pH, N-NH Energy output in milk was 7% higher in T0 and T4 than in T8 and correlated well with the higher energy intake of those animals ( The rate of passage from the reticulorumen (k Average rumen pH was lower in T4 than in T8, probably because the former group had a higher OM intake, which increased the supply of fermentable substrates and led to a higher total VFA production ( In every treatment, average and hourly ruminal concentrations of NH Urinary concentrations of allantoin and uric acid, urinary excretion of purine derivatives, intestinal flow of microbial N, and efficiency of N use for microbial N synthesis were not affected by the treatments ( Concentration of blood glucose was higher in T0 than in T8 ( Overall, the results suggest that differences in milk production reported in the literature between cows fed a TMR with or without FF, including those observed in this experiment ( In this study, cows with 4 The authors thank E. de Torres, director of the Experimental Station of the Veterinary Faculty, and V. Amaral, E. Pirotto, and M. Puig for assistance with animal care. The experiment was partially supported by