Previous studies indicated that absolute CH4 emissions and CH4 yield might increase and that milk production efficiency might decrease with age in cattle. Both would make strategies to increase longevity in dairy cattle less attractive. These aspects were experimentally determined in Brown Swiss cattle distributed continuously across a large age range. Thirty lactating dairy cows (876–3,648 d of age) received diets consisting of hay, corn silage, and grass pellets supplemented with 0 or 5kg of concentrate per day. Twelve heifers (199–778 d of age) received hay only. Cows and heifers were members of herds subjected to the 2 different feeding regimens (with or without concentrate) for the past 10 yr. Methane emissions were measured individually for 2 d in open-circuit respiration chambers, followed by quantifying individual feed intake and milk yield over 8 d. Additional data on digestibility, rumination time, and passage time of feed of all experimental animals were available. Regression analyses were applied to evaluate effects of age and feeding regimen. Body weight, milk yield, and the hay proportion of forage dry matter intake were considered as covariates. Methane emissions per unit of intake, body weight, and milk yield were significantly related to age. Their development in the cows with age was characterized by an increase to maximum at around 2,000 d of age, followed by a decline. This response was not accompanied by corresponding age-related changes in intake, chewing activity, digesta passage time, and digestibility of organic matter, which would have explained shifts in CH4. However, fiber digestibility showed a similar change with age as methane emissions, resulting in quite stable methane emissions per unit of digestible fiber. As expected, methane emissions intensity per unit of milk produced was greater by 8% without concentrate than with concentrate, but no difference was noted in the response to age when the animals were subjected to different feeding regimens. The efficiency of milk production was only marginally influenced by age and diet, and no different response was observed for age in the 2 dietary regimens. In conclusion, life cycle analyses of milk production systems focusing on longevity should consider changing methane yields with age in addition to the variation in environmental costs for replacements of culled cows.The contribution of methane emissions from ruminants to global greenhouse gas ( Almost in parallel with the increase in milk yield, there has been a distinct decrease in the length of the productive life of dairy cows, with cows reaching only A high feed conversion and milk production efficiency is the key for economically viable production systems and, given that this can be accomplished with the same feeds, is important also from a world nutrition point of view ( Differences in feed intake were also found to explain a considerable share of the phenotypic and genotypic variance found in CH The objective of the current study was to determine CH The experiment was approved by the veterinary office of the Swiss canton of Zurich (149/2013). The experiment was carried out from October 2013 to February 2014. More details on the animals and the experimental procedures are given in Grandl et al. (2016). The experimental animals were selected from 2 Brown Swiss herds kept at the Agricultural Education For the experiment, 2 For the lactating cows, the 0-CONC diet consisted of hay (ad libitum), corn silage (22 In the chambers and in the tiestall, feeding was performed from 0300 to 0800 h and from 1415 to 1800 h. During each of these periods, hay was provided in portions of 1 or 2 Samples of hay and corn silage were taken once per run. Samples of the grass pellets and the 2 concentrates, originating from the same batches, were collected twice in total. Subsamples of individual leftovers were dried at 60°C to constant weight for determination of DM. Standard procedures ( Body weight was measured on the first day of the 8-d collection period on a pallet scale. Milk yield was recorded at each milking by weighing of the milking bucket or using a mechanical milk meter (Tru-Test Limited, Auckland, New Zealand). Compositional analyses were performed on a MilkoScan FT6000 (Foss, Hillerød, Denmark) from Bronopol-conserved samples collected at every milking. Energy-corrected milk yield was calculated according to All animals stayed for 3 d in open-circuit respiration chambers (described by The efficiency measures calculated in the present study were feed conversion efficiency (ECM yield related to DMI), milk production efficiency (ECM yield related to BW), and RFI (difference between observed DMI and predicted DMI). For the latter, the predicted DMI was calculated according to All statistical analyses were performed with the software R ( For data of the nonlactating heifers, a separate regression model including feeding regimen and age as effects was applied, because age effects in heifers were presumed to be related to the growth and development of the juvenile animal. In contrast, age effects in mature cows were likely to be related to senescence. Furthermore, BW is naturally highly collinear with age in growing heifers, and the other covariates (ECM yield, hay proportion) used in the cow regressions were not applicable to the heifer data. The same diet was fed to heifers from both regimens. Thus, if significant feeding regimen differences existed in heifers, these would indicate Adjusted means for the feeding regimens ( Cows differed ( The regression analysis ( When ECM yield was expressed per unit of BW, BW and ECM yield were excluded from the full regression model. No age or feeding regimen effects on milk production efficiency were observed ( Cows of the 0-CONC regimen, compared with cows from the CTRL, produced more ( All CH In the present study, a population of heifers and lactating cows with age ranging from 0.5 to 10 yr was observed. Any age-related effects could be relevant for an environmental assessment of strategies focusing on longevity and limited use of concentrate. To study the latter, cows were selected from herds adapted to 2 distinct feeding strategies for more than 10 yr. However, in none of the traits described were significant interactions of age and feeding regimen found. Obviously, efficiency and CH With the present animal population it cannot be ruled out that the observed development with age was partly the result of an animal selection effect. The older cows in the study have probably been deliberately excluded from culling at several selection decisions over time. Thus, a bias in the older cows taken from a preselected group of animals with certain characteristics might exist. In Grandl et al. (2016), several variables of intake and digestion are described for the same animals, which are potential causes for variations in CH In the performance traits, namely BW, ECM yield, and DMI, some age-related changes were noted. Dry matter intake and also ECM yield, by tendency, increased with age, but the initial increase from primiparous cows to cows with few lactations seemed to level out in older cows. Milk production efficiency (ECM/BW) and feed conversion efficiency (ECM/DMI) showed no changes with age, whereas RFI increased with age. A previous compilation of results from growing versus adult cattle indicated that an increase in CH In the lactating cows of the present study, a curvilinear relationship between age and CH The animal model applied in the present study was suitable to discriminate diet-related effects on CH Cows of the 2 feeding regimens did not clearly differ in DMI, which seems contradictory to the lower BW and ECM yield of the 0-CONC animals compared with the CTRL animals. However, cows are able to compensate for the lower energy density of the forage-only diet compared with the CTRL diet by an increased forage consumption ( Compared with the CTRL cows, CH The main prediction tested in the present study was that absolute CH We thank A. Accola, D. Balestra, C. Brandenburger, K. Freuler, J. Jenewein, P. Küchler from Plantahof, M. Hunziker, H. Renfer, S. Rinderknecht, and U. Voegeli from Agrovet-Strickhof, S. Marquardt, R. Messikommer from ETH Zurich, and the laboratory team at ETH Zurich (C. Kunz, M. Mergani, P. Stirnemann, E. Wenk). Special thanks go to M. Kalisch (ETH Zurich) and M. Dolezal (University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna) for their assistance in the statistical analysis. The authors are grateful to the Mercator Research Program of the ETH Zurich World Food System Center for supporting this project. The predicted dry matter intake (