Live performance, bone health and metabolic responses to the interaction among stocking density and dietary concentrations of total calcium (TCa) and non-phytate phosphorus (NPP) were determined on 2,232 Ross 308 female broilers over a 3-wk experimental period. From 22 d of age, birds were randomly divided into 48 groups and provided with different corn-soybean meal-based diets varying in TCa (0.70% or 0.90%) and NPP (0.28% or 0.36%) content at 1 of 2 stocking densities [28.6 (LSD, 13 broilers/m2) and 39.6 (HSD, 18 broilers/m2) kg of predicted final BW/m2 floor space], according to a 2 × 2 × 2 factorial design with 6 replications in each treatment. Regardless of NPP supplementation, a high-TCa (0.90%) diet aggravated the impact of HSD on growth (BW gain and feed efficiency, P < 0.001) and motility (gait score, P < 0.001). This might be explained by deteriorating tibia quality (relative weight, mineral composition and biomechanical property; P < 0.01), due to the involvement of decreasing duodenal absorption (type IIb sodium-phosphate co-transporter mRNA, P < 0.001) in reduced phosphorus retention (P < 0.001). On the contrary, increasing dietary NPP (0.36%), particularly if high in TCa (0.90%), boosted TCa retention (P < 0.05) by improving absorption (calcium-binding protein D28k transcription, P < 0.05) for LSD chickens, hence enhancing bone development (relative tibia weight and tibia breaking strength, P < 0.05) and leg health (walking ability, P < 0.05). Together, HSD and LSD birds show an impaired TCa tolerance and a higher TCa+NPP threshold, respectively, to allow the optimization of bone quality via altered intestinal absorption.High stocking density ( During the normal mineralization process, Ca and P are transferred from feed into the bone through the intestine and kidney (Wideman Jr., The aim of the present study was to determine the involvement of decreasing Ca and P absorption in bone-related deterioration of leg condition with HSD, and the role of dietary intervention. Because older broilers are less sensitive to differences in BW and become less lame for each unit of BW gain than the younger (Kestin et al., All study procedures were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Qingdao Agricultural University and were in accordance with the Guidelines for Experimental Animals established by the Ministry of Science and Technology (Beijing, China). Day-old female broiler chicks (Ross 308), obtained from a local hatchery, were raised on rice hulls (5 cm in depth) in an environmentally controlled room. The ambient temperature was 33°C at 1 d, reduced by 1°C every other day to achieve 28°C at 11 d, then 26°C at 16 d, 24°C at 20 d, 23°C at 24 d, 22°C at 28 d, and 21°C after 32 d of age. The lighting schedule was constant at 20 lx for 23L:1D until 7 d, 10 lx for 18L:6D before 14 d, 5 lx for 15L:9D by the end of 28 d, 3 lx for 18L:6D from 29 to 35 d, and 2.5 lx for 23L:1D up to 42 d. From 1 to 21 d, all birds were offered a common starter diet, and then switched to experimental grower diets until the end of the rearing period. During the entire study, feed and water were provided ad libitum. At 22 d of age, 2,232 healthy birds with similar BW (850 ± 42.1 g), were selected and randomly assigned to 48 floor pens (2.00 m × 1.60 m), furnished with tube feeders and nipple drinkers. The treatments, namely stocking density and dietary concentrations of total Ca ( A range of diets were formulated with limestone and dicalcium phosphate to contain 2 levels of TCa (0.90% or 0.70%) and 2 levels of NPP (0.36% or 0.28%, Table At the beginning (22 d) and end (42 d) of the experiment, feed and birds were weighed by pen to calculate feed intake ( From 37 to 41 d of age, 5 g/kg chromic oxide was mixed into the diets as an indigestible marker for apparent retention. Excreta samples were collected once daily from a container (1 cm × 40 cm × 1 m) with a grid placed in each pen, pooled as one sample to represent one replication, and stored in a freezer (-20°C). Gait score was examined for 6 randomly selected birds per pen at 42 d of age, according to a previously described method (Kestin et al., After 8 h of feed withdrawal, 3 42-day-old birds from each pen, representing the average and the variability of the pen, were randomly selected, blood sampled (2 mL; brachial vein, heparinized syringe), and then killed by stunning and exsanguination. Plasma, obtained by centrifugation at 400 × Apparent retention of TCa or TP ( Chromium, TCa, and TP concentrations were determined in the diet and excreta samples following nitric and perchloric acid wet-ash digestion (method 935.13, AOAC International, Daily TCa or TP intake was calculated as dietary TCa or TP concentration multiplied by FI. Retained TCa or TP was calculated as g of TCa or TP intake × apparent TCa or TP retention/100. Excreted TCa or TP represented the difference between dietary TCa or TP intake and apparent TCa or TP retention. Plasma Ca and P concentration and alkaline phosphatase ( The left tibia was weighed after defatting (sequential 36-h Soxhlet extractions, with ethyl alcohol, then diethyl ether) and drying (100°C, 24 h), then ashing in a muffle furnace (600°C, 18 h). The contents of Ca and P were determined respectively by EDTA titration and ammonium metavanadate colorimetric methods. The right tibia was used to measure the breaking strength by a tension compression tester (DCS-5, Shimadzu Autograph, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with the 3-point bending test. Force was applied to the center of the bone with a load cell capacity of 50 kg and a crosshead speed of 10 mm/min, which was held by 2 supports spaced 4.0 cm apart. Total RNA was extracted from the duodenal mucosa using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA), and portions (1.0 μg) were reverse-transcribed into single-stranded cDNA with an oligo-dT primer using AMV Reverse Transcriptase (Invitrogen) as previously described (Li et al., The PCR was carried out for 35, 42 and 40 cycles for CaBP-D28k, NaPi-IIb and β-actin, respectively, to ensure amplification efficiency in the linear range of each primer set (Table A 3-way analysis of variance ( A significant interaction ( The interaction between stocking density and TCa supplementation was significant ( A TCa × NPP interaction ( Stocking density had an interaction with dietary TCa concentration ( Plasma concentrations of Ca and P and activities of ALP were all influenced ( The interaction of stocking-density × TCa ( In most of the previous studies (Yalçin et al., In many of the earlier studies (Rama Rao et al., In accordance with previous studies (Sørensen et al., The metabolism of Ca and P may account for the observed growth, bone and motion responses. Owing to a depression in FI, HSD birds consumed less TCa than did the LSD, without respect to any diet. In support of the lowering plasma Ca concentration, the reducing TCa excretion, and hence the increasing retention and retention coefficient with decreased dietary TCa from 0.90% to 0.70% were all of greater magnitude in HSD compared with LSD. Consistent with the up-regulated CaBP-D28k mRNA expression in duodenum, the improved Ca absorption in terms of low-TCa (0.70%) diets seemed to be more obvious in HSD than in LSD. With increasing inclusion of TCa in diets, TP retention or retention coefficient, and concurrently the absorption as manifested by duodenal NaPi-IIb gene transcription, were all decreased in HSD birds, suggesting TCa was more influential than NPP. The reverse was the case for the LSD, where the TCa retention was augmented by elevating NPP while maintaining a fixed TCa concentration (0.90%), corresponding to the abundance of CaBP-D28k mRNA in the intestinal lumen, indicative of the availability of Ca. Birds are reluctant or even unable to defend an NPP intake target through over-consumption of TCa, but are more willing to over-consume NPP to reach a TCa intake target (Bradbury et al., In the present study, the effect of stocking density may have been confounded by group size and feeder or drinker space, and thus requires some qualification. In addition, birds were reared under very low light intensity (2.5 to 3.0 lx) for most of the time, partially explaining the slightly inferior performance to the breed standard. Because light intensity affects activity levels and leg health (Blatchford et al., In conclusion, high dietary TCa exacerbates the disadvantage of HSD on growth, bone quality, and leg health in a NPP-independent manner, owing to the reduced TP retention with decreasing intestinal absorption. A high TCa+TP diet increases TCa retention of LSD birds by promoting duodenal absorption, thus improving bone development and walking ability. These findings provide a basis for the feeding strategy to prevent leg weakness and the resulting production problems. This work was supported by grants from the