In order to investigate the behaviors and stability of rock strata surrounding an entry with bolt supporting in large dip coal seams (LDCSs) dipping from 25° to 45°, a self-developed rotatable experimental frame for similar material simulation test was used to build the model with the dip of 30°, based on analyses of geological and technological conditions in Huainan mine area, Anhui, China. The strata behaviors, such as extracting- and mining-induced stresses development, deformation and failure modes, were synthetically integrated during working face advancing. Results show that the development characteristics of mining-induced stress and deformation are asymmetrical in the roadway. The strata behaviors are totally different in different sections of the roadway. Because of asymmetrically geometrical structure influenced by increasing dip, strata dislocating, rock falling and breaking occur in roof. Then, squeezing, collapsing and caving of coal happen in upper- and lower-rib due to shearing action caused by asymmetrical roof bending and dislocating. Owing to the absence of supporting, floor heaving is very violent and usually the zone of floor heaving develops from the lower-rib to upper-rib. Engineering practices show that, due to the asymmetrical characteristics of rock pressure and roadway configuration, it is more difficult to implement bolt supporting system to control rock stability of roadways in LDCSs. The upper-rib and roof of entries are the key sections. Consequently, it is reliable to use asymmetrical bolt-mesh-cable supporting system to control rock stability of roadways based on the asymmetrical characteristics of roadway configuration and strata behaviors.Inclined coal seams result in asymmetrical entries, making the control of rock stability more difficult when bolt supporting system is implemented, which limits the safe and high-efficient mining of LDCSs dipping from 25° to 45°. Physical experiment using simulation material is an important method to investigate the movement and deformation of rocks and stress redistribution. Also, the method is used to study mechanical behaviors of rocks surrounding roadways with bolt supporting system, and it plays an active role in mining engineering The A3 seam in the roadway No.63103 of Xinzhuanzhi coal mine is a typically LDCS. Its dip is 28°–31°, averaging 30°; and its thickness is 2.4–4.5 According to geological conditions, engineering practices and experimental equipments, the geometrical ratio, density ratio and stress ratio were determined as 0.02, 0.6 and 0.012, respectively. In the physical model, powder sand was used for aggregate, lime and gypsum for cementing materials, and mica powder for separated material ( In this paper, a self-developed rotatable experimental frame was used to build the physical model with the dip of 30°, whose sizes are 2 Influenced by the asymmetrical configuration of roadways and development of mining-induced stress, the upper-rib firstly squeezes gradually and collapses finally. Due to the gravity and mining-induced stress along the dip direction, the roof deformation experiences the stages of dislocating, bending, breaking and caving. The primary behaviors of lower-rib are violently squeezing and collapsing in the forms of roof strata dislocating and load transfer. All above show that it is very difficult to control the stability of surrounding rocks, and it is important to implement bolt supporting system based on the geometrical configuration of roadway, rock pressure and strata behaviors in the LDCSs ( In a global sense, the data obtained by the resistance strain gage can represent the mining-induced stress. Based on the strain curves of rocks at different distances from the surface during loading process (  In For the upper-rib, when From For the floor, when Consequently, the peak strain mainly occurs within the distance of 3 From rock displacement curves ( When When When When Consequently, the upper-rib of the roadway in the LDCSs is the most sensitive to the mining-induced stress, followed by the lower-rib and roof. But roof dislocation is the key factor that controls the upper-rib and lower-rib failure because of tensile and compressive stresses. Influenced by the asymmetrical configuration of the roadway in the LDCSs, the mechanical characteristics of different sections of the roadway are anisotropic and asymmetrical. Actually, the large dip delays the development of deformation and peak strain in the roof and lower-rib, but the bearing capacity of rocks is increased. On the other hand, the large dip accelerates the deformation and peak strain in the upper-rib, but the bearing capacity of rocks is decreased. While extracting entries in solid coals, the roof and upper-rib are usually approximately unstable. Tensile fractures happen at the top corner and dislocation often occurs in the roof, which leads to the collapsing of lower-rib. Shearing failure, rib squeezing and collapsing often occur in the upper-rib. Consequently, the roof and upper-rib should be controlled as the key sections in implementing bolt supporting system. Engineering practices show that implementing bolt supporting system with high shear strength is effective in controlling roof stability, and setting cable along the strike to enhance rib strength is feasible. However, stability control of rocks in the floor without supporting is the most difficult.