In view of the usefulness of Empirical Mode Decomposition (EMD), Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), and Most Relevant Matching Extension (MRME) methods in dealing with nonlinear signals, we propose a new way of combining these methods to deal with signal prediction. We found the results of combining EMD with either ANN or MRME to have higher prediction precision for a time series than the result of using EMD alone.Empirical mode decomposition (EMD) is a method of transforming an empirical time series into a few Intrinsic Mode Function (IMF) components and a tendency term, which is the final drab and smooth part of the original sequence In this paper, we show how to use EMD to decompose a simulation signal into several IMF components and a tendency, how to treat the endpoint problem in two ways, how to do signal prediction by using RBF (Radial Basis Function) neural network for each component separately, and how to reconstruct the final prediction results. During the EMD decomposition, the resultant IMF components must meet the following conditions: 1) The number of maximum and minimum points and the number of zero-crossing in different directions must be approximately equal; 2) the mean value of the maximum and minimum at any point must be zero. The decomposition process is as follows For a signal Checking whether the new signal meets the above-mentioned basic requirement of IMF, or whether the residual At the end, In order to shorten the screening process, a First we show how to apply EMD directly to where  Reference In this paper, we use a radial basic function neural network, select 15 consecutive data samples as input and the next 12 samples as the output, and by reiteration generate 60 groups of training samples. We then select 5 groups as test samples and feed them into the Matlab neural network toolbox. After testing different spread value we choose the the network which has the best performance to generate extreme values at both ends of the data. As shown in Based on references Mark all mmima from left to right as Make Take the waveform corresponding to the maximum correlation coefficient as the most recent wave. Denote the corresponding maximum value of Add to the real data and extend the actual waveform to the left. Extend the actual waveform to the right similarly-Choose 0.9 or more as corrrelation coefficients generally. If the requirement is not meet, we may add directly the avenge value of three neighboring extreme values at the endpoints. In this way, we can get the IMF components shown in After the extension by the different methods and reconstruction of the predicted values of each component, different results are generated. As shown in The neural network extension and the most relevant match extension methods are both good solutions to the endpoint-effect problem. EMD decomposition can supply input variables with higher quality to the RBF neural network. The new prediction method presented here can achieve higher precision.