Stress arch is a common phenomenon occurring in continupous materials and has also been proved to have great influences on the self-stabilization of soils or rock masses after excavation. In this paper, based on UDEC simulation, stress redistribution after excavation is investigated for a kind of special discontinuous material, i.e. blocky stratified rock mass. A layered stress arch system is observed with each stress arch lying over another. This special phenomenon is defined herein as “stress arch bunch”. Effects of dip angle of bedding plane, lateral pressure and joint offset on this stress arch bunch are studied. Its formation mechanism is also discussed based on voussoir beam theory. Excavation activities will disturb the surrounding rocks, and thereby break the initial equilibrium within rock masses. To cope with this disturbance, the rock masses have to generate a self-adaption mechanism that redistributes the stress to maintain the stability as possible. Therefore, the redistributed stresses will determine the loads and design methods for the tunnel lining structure and reinforcement system. Stress arch is consequently formed during this process, which can make stress distribution more reasonable and prevent the occurrence of further failure. Supported by stress arch, rock masses above the arch basically remain stable, while those inside the arch will detach from the main mass and act as an exterior load on the lining structure. Early achievements of stress arching effect in load calculation for lining structure include the studies of  where The value of  To obtain a clear understanding of formation mechanism of stress arch in blocky stratified rock masses, three series of numerical experiments, considering the effects of dip angle of bedding plane, the offsets between two joint sets, as well as the lateral stresses, are conducted with the two-dimensional discrete element code UDEC. Series 1 is mainly concentrated on the effect of dip angle on the distribution of secondary stress in blocky stratified rock masses by fixing the lateral pressure coefficient  The bedding plane is continuous in the direction of inclination of stratified rock masses, while the other discontinuities (joints) are discontinuous in the direction of stratification, as shown in For comparison, a case of excavation in continuous material is also presented. Parameters used in UDEC simulations are the same as those in As illustrated in  Individual component of this arching system is asymmetric except that the dip angle is 0°. The span of these arches declines with the increase in distance away from the excavation boundaries. The trajectory of the minor compressive principal stress in each layer is not of an exact arch shape, but of partially linear in the middle with direction parallel to stratification. It is evident in Numerical results of Series 2 are shown in As shown in Numerical results of Series 3 are shown in The aforementioned numerical results show that the stress arch in blocky stratified rock masses is distinct from that in continuous soil masses. It is greatly attributed to the highly discontinuous structure of rock masses. For a theoretical explanation, voussoir beam theory should be therefore introduced firstly. The concept of voussoir was first proposed by To study the stress distribution within a single voussoir beam, a numerical model was built in UDEC, as illustrated in From As illustrated in Moreover, as described in Furthermore, under the condition of the same density and vertical load, the span of rock beam is most critical to the stress distribution within a voussoir beam. This means that if the span of rock beam is the same, the tensile stresses induced by the bending of rock beam will also bear no difference. This could be a good explanation for the tiny difference in both the distribution shape and magnitude of stresses between subcases S3a, S3b and S3c, where only joint offset varies. Stress arch in discontinuous material is rarely investigated in former researches. Through robust numerical experiments by using two-dimensional discrete element code UDEC, the distribution of the minor compressive principal stress is investigated. Not a single stress arch, but a bunch of stress arches with one overlying another are observed both above the Stress arch is generated in every rock layer within arching zone. Individual component of this arching system is asymmetric except that the dip angle is 0°. The span of these arches declines with the increment of distance from the excavation boundaries. The trajectory of the minor compressive principal stress in each layer is not of an exact arch shape, but of partially linear in the middle with direction parallel to stratification. With the growing of lateral pressure, both the arching zones above the upper free boundary and below the lower free boundary will diminish. When