In the present study, persimmon puree was incorporated into the ice cream mix at different concentrations (8, 16, 24, 32, and 40%) and some physicochemical (dry matter, ash, protein, pH, sugar, fat, mineral, color, and viscosity), textural (hardness, stickiness, and work of penetration), bioactive (antiradical activity and total phenolic content), and sensory properties of samples were investigated. The technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution approach was used for the determination of optimum persimmon puree concentration based on the sensory and bioactive characteristics of final products. Increase in persimmon puree resulted in a decrease in the dry matter, ash, fat, protein contents, and viscosity of ice cream mix. Glucose, fructose, sucrose, and lactose were determined to be major sugars in the ice cream samples including persimmon and increase in persimmon puree concentration increased the fructose and glucose content. Better melting properties and textural characteristics were observed for the samples with the addition of persimmon. Magnesium, K, and Ca were determined to be major minerals in the samples and only K concentration increased with the increase in persimmon content. Bioactive properties of ice cream samples improved and, in general, acetone-water extracts showed higher bioactivity compared with ones obtained using methanol-water extracts. The technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution approach showed that the most preferred sample was the ice cream containing 24% persimmon puree.Ice cream, a sweet dairy product including milk, sweeteners, stabilizers, emulsifiers, and flavorings, is produced by mixing its ingredients, followed by pasteurization and homogenization. Afterward, it is aged at low temperature and finally frozen ( Fruits are good sources for the fortification of ice creams because of their sweet and desired taste and aroma. Persimmon is a fruit widespread in China, Japan, and Korea and is also traditionally used for medicinal purposes ( In the present study, the goal was to improve the quality of ice cream by incorporating different concentrations of persimmon puree into the ice cream. At this point, selection of the optimum persimmon concentration is a difficult task based on 2 selected properties (sensory score and bioactivity), as one sample might display superior bioactivity, whereas the other sample might be the choice because of sensory properties. In these specific conditions, and similar circumstances, the technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution ( In the present study, the effect of persimmon puree addition on some physicochemical, textural, sensory, and bioactive properties of ice cream was investigated, and the TOPSIS multi-decision criteria were used for the determination of optimum persimmon puree concentration based on sensory and bioactive properties. Ultra-high temperature-treated milk (Dost; AkGida Co., Sakarya, Turkey) was purchased from a local market in Kayseri, Turkey. Cream (35% milk fat) was obtained from Pinar Dairy Co. (İzmir, Turkey). Stabilizer (salep) and emulsifier (mono- and diglyceride) were provided by Özselamoğ lu Food Ing. Co. (Kayseri, Turkey). Table sugar (Panküpü Co., Kayseri, Turkey) was used to sweeten the ice creams. Fresh persimmons were purchased from a local market in Kayseri, Turkey. Ice cream samples were manufactured according to the process flowchart given in Dry matter, ash, and fat analyses were conducted as outlined by official procedures ( An HPLC system (Agilent 1100 Series; Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA) equipped with a Mineral contents (Ca, Mg, and K) of ice cream samples were determined using an inductively coupled plasma ( Total phenolic content of the samples was determined according to the modified method of The antiradical activity of the samples was determined using 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl ( Textural characterization of samples was conducted using a texture analyzer (TA.XT Plus; Stable Micro Systems Ltd., Godalming, UK) equipped with a HDP-P/5 attachment (Stable Micro Systems Ltd.) using a 30-kg load cell. Ice cream mixes were filled into the cylindrical plastic cups and the cups were placed on the center of a heavy duty platform. The samples were brought quickly from the freezer one by one for the analysis and the test was started immediately. Pretest speed, test speed, and posttest speed were set to be 1, 0.1, and 5 Sensory properties of ice cream samples were determined by a trained panel comprising 10 members (graduate students and academic staff of the Food Engineering Department at Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey). Before starting the tests, panel members were trained regarding the ice cream samples. The training The hierarchy for selection of persimmon concentration is shown in Normalization of the decision matrix was done using the following equation: Formation of the normalized decision matrix was done (the weight of each criterion is shown in The positive ideal solution ( The distance ( The closeness coefficient ( The ranking of the alternatives was determined based on the Some physical properties of ice cream samples enriched with persimmon puree at different concentrations are shown in  Persimmon is a fruit that generally contains 12.5  Because persimmon fruit is rich in phenolics, addition of the fruit into ice cream may supply phenolic antioxidants in important amounts. Incorporation of persimmon puree provided significant diffusion of phenolic substances into the ice cream (  Sensory scores of the ice cream samples are illustrated in The demand for healthy foods is increasing due to consumer awareness of the relationship between diet and health. Therefore, a combination of bioactive properties and sensory characteristics during selection of a product is crucial, which may be realized by the TOPSIS. The importance ratio of the bioactive and sensory properties was assigned as 20 and 80%, respectively; this means that sensory properties are more important than the bioactive properties of the food. The normalized and weighted normalized matrices were formed by using the real values obtained from analyses ( The findings of this study showed that persimmon is a fruit containing nutritionally important components,