Eggshell quality is a major concern to the poultry industry: eggs with poor-quality shells hatch poorly and are rejected in the processing plant. The eggshell gland (ESG) proteins and the matrix proteins, which participate in crystallization, fulfill important functions during formation of the calcified tissues and contribute to the biomechanical properties of the mature product. We selected layers that consistently produced eggshells with specific abnormalities, and continued to do so after molting, and evaluated the expression of 2 genes—osteopontin (OPN) and calbindin—as related to particular eggshell abnormalities. These genes are synthesized by the ESG and appear to participate in the calcification process. When the ESG produces normal eggshells, OPN was expressed uniformly by all of the epithelial cells facing the lumen, and calbindin was expressed by the glandular epithelium. In contrast, in the layers producing pimpled eggs, OPN was expressed only in sections of the pseudostratified epithelium, separated by areas of cells devoid of OPN gene expression, whereas calbindin was expressed at much greater levels throughout the glandular epithelium. Almost no OPN gene expression was observed in the ESG of layers producing corrugated shells, but their pattern of calbindin expression was similar to but somewhat greater than that in ESG that produced normal eggshells. In cases in which eggs had cracks at the sharp or blunt poles, OPN was expressed only at the side opposite to the cracks, whereas calbindin was expressed at both sides equally independent of the cracks. The results suggest that synthesis of the proteins associated with the formation of eggshells with the various abnormalities is controlled by different mechanisms. This may imply that more than 1 strategy will be required to improve eggshell quality.The quality of the eggshell is of primary concern to the poultry industry ( The avian egg shell is formed during the passage of the egg through the isthmus and the eggshell gland ( It is widely accepted that the organic matrix components play roles in the control of crystallization and eggshell formation ( In this study, we evaluated the relationship to eggshell abnormalities of the gene expression of 2 proteins – calbindin and osteopontin ( In the present study, we evaluated the expression of calbindin and OPN genes in the ESG of layers selected for producing eggs with specific surface abnormalities and with cracks in discrete locations. A flock of White Leghorns hens were fed a commercial layer diet consisting of 18% CP and 4% calcium, as described previously ( The selected birds were sampled before onset of reproduction and biopsies were taken at 1 h before egg lay. Biopsies of the ESG (2 punch biopsies from each location from 2 birds from each shell-type group were taken) – normal, pimpled, and corrugated shells, and cracks at the sharp and blunt poles – were collected into PBS and fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS at 4°C. Serial 5-μm sections were prepared after the samples had been dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions, cleared in chloroform, and embedded in Paraplast (McCormick Scientific, St, Louis, MO). For hybridization, the sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated through a graded series of ethanol solutions, rinsed in distilled water (5 min), and incubated in 2 × Layers that laid eggs with specific shell malformations were identified among a flock of 2,400 birds. While the birds were 20 to 40 wk of age, the eggshell characteristics were recorded daily. Layers whose eggs consistently had abnormal shells were transferred to individual cages. Of the layers in this age range, 11% were found to lay eggs with various shell irregularities. The distribution of shell types within this consistent group was as follows: pimpled shells (11%), corrugated shells (8%), cracks at the sharp or blunt pole (20 or 2%, respectively), soft shells (35%), without any shell (9%), and normal shells for the rest (15%; In the ESG of layers that produced eggs with normal shells, the OPN gene was expressed exclusively by the basal pseudostratified epithelium cells with nuclei close to the basement membrane; OPN was expressed uniformly by all the epithelial cells of the ESG. Calbindin, on the other hand, was expressed by the glandular epithelium of the ESG, especially by cells below the pseudostratified epithelium. At this stage of the egg cycle, calbindin was expressed at a low level ( Layers that consistently laid eggs with cracks at the sharp or blunt pole were selected, and ESG biopsies from both poles in each layer were taken for evaluation of OPN and calbindin gene expression. In layers that laid eggs mainly with cracks at the sharp pole, the level and pattern of expression of the OPN and calbindin genes in biopsies taken from the ESG part corresponding to the blunt pole were similar to those in the biopsies taken from layers that produced normal shells ( In this study, we demonstrated for the first time a relationship between irregularities in individual ESG gene expression, on the one hand, and specific shell abnormalities, on the other hand, which suggests that there are differences in the regulation of synthesis of various proteins, during the formation of shells with various irregularities. The enormous number of proteins found in the eggshell suggests a very complex mechanism of regulation of shell formation that would be expected to operate in different compartments of the oviduct and at a precise time intervals. Most of the proteins found in the shell probably originate in the ESG. In previous studies, eggshell abnormalities were associated with layer lines and lay periods ( In this study, we evaluated the expression of OPN and calbindin genes synthesized in the ESG of layers that had been selected on the basis of laying mainly eggs with specific shell abnormalities. These 2 genes were chosen for several reasons.  They are both related to calcium metabolism: OPN is intimately involved in the regulation of both physiological and pathological mineralization ( Both are associated with eggshell calcification and are expressed in the ESG in a circadian fashion during the daily egg formation cycle ( Association was demonstrated between OPN and calbindin gene expression and reduction of eggshell thickness after xenoestrogen treatment ( Xenoestrogen treatment resulted in thinning of the mammillary layer at the same site where OPN was localized ( OPN was hypothesized to regulate eggshell formation by inhibiting calcite growth at specific crystallographic faces and compartmental boundaries, thereby creating a biomineralized architecture whose structure provides for the properties and functions of the eggshell ( In attempting to correlate the expression of these genes with shell cracks and breakage, we compared their expressions in ESG biopsies taken from locations corresponding to the sharp or blunt poles ( In summary, we demonstrated that OPN and calbindin are differentially expressed in the ESG of layers characterized by their eggshells with surface abnormalities or by cracks at specific sites. These results suggest that there are several different regulation mechanisms controlling the synthesis of the proteins involved in formation of eggshells that exhibit different abnormalities. These observations also raise the question of the efficacy of any single treatment, pharmacological or other, for all shell abnormalities. The research reported here was supported by the