The objective of this study was to evaluate the effects of reducing forage particle length (FPL) and the inclusion of cottonseed hulls (CSH) on intake, digestibility, chewing activity, and milk production of cows in early lactation. Sixteen multiparous cows averaging 17±3 d in milk and 677±58kg BW were assigned to one of four 4×4 Latin squares. One square contained ruminally cannulated cows to evaluate effects of treatment on rumen fermentation and function. During each of the 23-d periods, cows were offered one of four total mixed rations that differed in particle length (long or short corn silage) and CSH inclusion rate (0 or 8% DM). Dietary treatments were: long no CSH (LGNH), long with CSH (LGH), short no CSH (SHNH), and short with CSH (SHH). Total physically effective NDF content, measured as percentage of NDF greater than 1.18mm, was similar across diets, but mean particle length decreased with reducing FPL and inclusion of CSH. Dry matter intake was not significantly affected by FPL but was significantly increased with the inclusion of CSH. Decreasing FPL and the inclusion of CSH significantly increased neutral detergent fiber intake. Total chewing activity expressed as minutes per day was unaffected by FPL and the inclusion of CSH. Both eating and ruminating efficiency expressed as minutes per kilogram of neutral detergent fiber intake increased with increasing FPL and decreased with the inclusion of CSH. Milk production did not differ across treatments, but the inclusion of CSH significantly increased percent and yield of milk protein. Reducing FPL tended to reduce percentage milk fat but not yield. Mean ruminal pH was not affected by FPL but was highest on diets containing CSH, even though no treatment effects were observed on total VFA, acetate, or propionate concentration. These results indicate that corn silage FPL is a poor predictor of total chewing time and rumen pH but is useful in understanding factors affecting feeding behavior. In addition, the inclusion of CSH, resulted in increased rumination and mean rumen pH even though effects on VFA concentration were not observed.Current In the northeastern United States, corn silage is commonly used as a major forage component of dairy rations. The high nutritional value of corn silage is in part due to its relatively high palatability and energy value; in addition, the corn silage contributes to the animal fiber requirement. Similar to other forages, the value of corn silage may be greatly influenced by harvesting techniques. Fine chopping corn silage improves packing density and fermentation, but its effect on the chewing activity and rumen fermentation is less clear. Although reduction in forage particle size usually results in reduced chewing activity ( Nonforage fiber sources ( If guidelines outlining the physical requirements of feed are to be established, an empirical, repeatable, and accurate system to analyze feed particle size must be developed and universally accepted. Based on properties of the ASAE Standard (S424) of forage particle size determination, the Penn State Particle Separator ( The objectives of the following experiment were 1) to determine the effects of feeding corn silage-based diets of different particle size to cows in early lactation and 2) to evaluate the ability of the PSPS to measure effective fiber. Pioneer corn hybrid 34K77 (Pioneer Hi-Bred International, Des Moines, IA) was harvested at a whole plant DM content of 30.6 During each of the 23-d periods, cows were offered one of four TMR that differed in FPL (long ( Sixteen lactating multiparous Holstein cows averaging 17 Samples of feed were collected daily and composited weekly. Collected samples were immediately frozen (−20°C) and stored for further analysis. Samples were then dried at 55°C in a forced-air oven and ground (1-mm screen; Wiley mill, Aurthur A. Thomas Co., Philadelphia, PA). All feed and forage samples were analyzed in duplicate for moisture, Kjeldahl nitrogen using a Kjetec 1030 autoanalyzer, ether extract, calcium and phosphorus and percent ash ( Eating and ruminating activity was measured during d 15 and 16 of each period using Graze Jaw Movement Analysis Software of the IGER Behavior Recorder (Ultra Sound Advice, London, UK) described by Beginning on d 9 of each period at 0800 and 2000 Liquid passage rates were determined using Co-EDTA as described by The last day of each period and 4 The PSPS was used to measure particle size for both forage and TMR as described by Milk production was measured and recorded daily from d 15 to 23 of each period. On d 15, 16, 19, and 20 milk samples were collected and preserved using 2-bromo-2-nitropropane-1,3 diol. Milk samples were analyzed for milk fat and true protein by the Pennsylvania DHIA milk testing laboratory using infrared spectrophotometry (Foss 605B Milk-Scan; Foss Electric, Hillerød, Denmark). Performance data were analyzed as a replicated 4 When measured using the PSPS, particle size distribution and X Differences in TMR particle size were small (less than 10%), but practically, harvesting a longer particle size would create serious deleterious effects, as proper packing density necessary to initiate and sustain proper fermentation, would be more difficult to achieve. Although it is difficult to harvest corn silage much longer, LG corn silage in this experiment was similar to that used by Orts adjusted DM and NDF intake and BW are presented in Both total body weight and body weight change were significantly increased in cows fed SH corn silage, but cows fed diets that included LG corn silage lost body weight. Inclusion of CSH did not affect either total or change in body weight, similar to others ( Decreasing FPL did not affect total eating time per day but significantly increased ruminating time. In comparison TC per kilogram of NDFI tended ( Although total time spent chewing was not different across treatments, the inclusion of CSH tended ( Apparent total-tract digestibility of diets are presented in Digestibility of TNC was significantly lower while digestibility of NDF tended ( Rumen fill was not affected by FPL and is consistent with other studies examining this effect ( Feed, digesta, and fecal particle size data are presented in Rumen pH, ammonia, and VFA concentration data are presented in Milk production and composition data are presented in Milk fat depression due to low ruminal pH and A:P ratio was expected from cows consuming shorter forage and diets of shorter particle size as observed by Dairy cattle require fiber in coarse physical form, which is effective in maintaining proper rumen health and function. Commonly, two methods are used to measure the effective fiber portion of dairy rations. Effective NDF is defined as the total ability of a feed to maintain normal milk fat levels ( The animal response used to measure peNDF is TC expressed as minutes per kilogram of NDFI. As particle size of rations increase the peNDF content is believed to also increase, resulting in elevated TC, salivary buffer secretion, and ruminal pH ( Thus, it seems likely that forage physical characteristics may have a smaller influence on rumen pH and fermentation than originally believed when rations meet Reducing particle size of corn silage did not significantly affect chewing activity, DMI, rumen pH, apparent digestion of TNC and fiber, or milk production in early lactation. Although physical effectiveness of corn silage was not affected, results suggest that increasing particle size of corn silage may result in an increased sorting of the TMR. Substitution of approximately 8% CSH for corn silage fiber reduced TMR particle size, decreasing TC per unit of NDFI, but increased DMI. Reduction in TC due to the incorporation of CSH merely resulted in small effects on rumen pH that did not affect milk production or percent fat and protein. Finally, results of this study are interpreted to indicate that peNDF, as measured by the PSPS, is a poor predictor of TC and rumen pH, but measurement of particle size using the PSPS may be useful in understanding factors affecting feeding behavior. This research was supported in part by