This study was carried out to investigate the possibility of adding nanopowdered eggshell (NPES) into yogurt to improve the functionality of yogurt and the effects of adding NPES on the physicochemical, microbial, and sensory properties of the products during storage. The pH and mean lactic acid bacteria counts of NPES-added (0.15–0.45%, wt/vol) yogurt ranged from 4.31 to 4.66 and from 6.56×108 to 8.56×108
                     cfu/mL, respectively, whereas these values ranged from 4.13 to 4.44 and 8.46×108 to 1.39×109, respectively, for the control samples during storage at 5°C for 16d, which indicates a prolonged shelf-life with NPES-supplemented yogurt. Color analysis showed that the lightness (L*) and position between red and green (a*) values were not significantly influenced by the addition of NPES. However, the position between yellow and blue (b*) value significantly increased with the addition of the concentration (0.45%, wt/vol) of NPES at d 16 of storage. Sensory evaluation revealed that NPES-added yogurts showed a notably less sourness score and a higher astringency score than the control. An earthy flavor was higher in 0.45% NPES-supplemented yogurt compared with the control. Based on the results obtained from the current study, the concentration (0.15 to 0.30%, wt/vol) of NPES can be used to formulate NPES-supplemented yogurt without any significant adverse effects on the physicochemical, microbial, and sensory properties.Eggshell contains about 39% elemental Ca and the bioavailability of eggshell Ca is as high as that from CaCO Nanotechnology is a new and emerging technique to be used in the food and pharmaceutical industries for promoting physical and biological properties, including solubility and stability. It has the potential to improve the food system in various ways; particularly, it is believed that nanosizing increases the bioavailability of the micro- and micronutrients present in food products. The enhancement of bioavailability of Ca through nanosizing has been reported recently by several studies ( Yogurt is a dairy product manufactured through the lactic acid fermentation of milk and is popularly consumed throughout the world. It is recognized as a healthy food for containing a large amount of nutritional Commercial milk was purchased from Seoul Dairy Co-op. (Seoul, Korea). Nanopowdered and micropowdered eggshells were procured from Apexel Co. (Pohang, Korea). Agar powder was obtained from Showa Chemical Co. (Tokyo, Japan). Difco lactobacilli de Man, Rogosa, and Sharpe (MRS) broth was bought from Becton, Dickinson and Co. (Detroit, MI). All chemicals used in this experiment were of analytical grade. Size and morphological characteristics of NPES and powdered eggshell ( For analyzing the particle size distribution, 0.1 Yogurts were manufactured following the modified procedure of The pH value of each sample was measured with a waterproof digital pen-type pH meter (pH-222; Lutron Electronics Co. Inc., Coopersburg, PA). All samples were measured in triplicate and the results were calculated as the mean value. The viscosities of the samples (50 The agar media was prepared by combining the powder MRS broth and 0.004% bromophenol blue (Sigma Aldrich, Germany) for lactic acid bacteria ( Color values of each yogurt sample were investigated using a colorimeter (CR210; Minolta, Tokyo, Japan) after calibrating its original value with a standard plate (X = 97.83, Y = 81.58, and Z = 91.51). Measured L*, a*, and b* values were used as indicators of lightness, redness, and yellowness, respectively. All samples were measured in triplicate. The sensory evaluation of control and NPES-supplemented yogurt was performed with 10 judges selected from graduate students of the Department of Food Science and Technology at Sejong University (Seoul, Korea). Three 1-h training sessions were held. At the end of the session, sensory attributes were established: 2 appearance attributes, 5 flavor and taste attributes, and 2 texture attributers. Standards used to define these flavor and taste descriptors were present during training and sensory evaluation. Before each session, commercial plain yogurt was presented to familiarize the assessors with the sensory properties of the yogurt. The judges scored each attribute on a scale of 0 to 7, in which 7 was the highest intensity and 0 was none. Samples were stored at 7°C before assessment. In each session, the order of assessment of the sample was randomized. The scores of each sample were averaged over all assessors. The sensory evaluation was performed in duplicate. All statistical analyses were performed using SAS (version 9.0; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). An ANOVA was performed using the general linear models procedure to determine the significant differences among the samples. Means were compared by using the Fisher least significant difference procedure. Significance was defined at the 5% level. The morphology of NPES and PES was observed by SEM as shown in The changes in pH of yogurts supplemented with various concentrations of NPES are presented in The changes in The effect of NPES addition on the viscosity of yogurt during 16 The additions of NPES or PES caused the enrichment of CaCO The changes in color in the NPES- and PES-supplemented yogurts stored at 5°C for 16 The sensory properties of NPES- and PES-supplemented yogurts during 16 This study was undertaken to develop NPES-supplemented yogurt and to see the changes in the physicochemical, microbial, and sensory properties of yogurts upon the addition of NPES during storage at 5°C for 16 The present study was supported by a grant from the