The aims of this work were to determine the effect of upland origin on milk composition when comparing similar lowland and upland production system and to highlight the factors responsible for the added value of upland milk from commercial farms. Tanker milk from 55 groups of farms (264 farms in total) in France, Slovakia, and Slovenia was collected twice during the indoor season and 3 times during the outdoor season. The tanker rounds were selected in each country to be balanced according to their origin (lowland or upland) and within upland or lowland groups, according to the forage systems: corn-based or grass-based forage system. At each milk sampling, the production conditions were recorded through on-farm surveys. The milk was analyzed for gross composition, carotenoids, minerals, fatty acids, phenolic compound derivatives, volatile organic compound concentrations, and color. The milk from upland and lowland areas differed in their contents of a few constituents. Upland milk was richer in not identified (n.i.) retention time (Rt) 13,59, 4-methylpentylbenzene, 1-methyl-2-n-hexylbenzene, and β-caryophyllene than lowland milk. These differences could be most likely attributable to the utilization of highly diversified and extensively managed semi-natural grasslands. The higher forbs content of upland pastures could be related as well to the richness in C18:3n-3, CLA cis-9,trans-11, MUFA, and PUFA we observed in upland compared with lowland milk during the outdoor season. In contrast, grazing on lowland pastures rich in grasses gave a yellower milk that was richer in β-carotene. Out of the few compounds showing a significant effect of origin or its interaction, most of the milk constituents were unaffected by the origin at all. However, almost all milk constituents differed according to the forage system and the season, and the differences observed between seasons can be attributed to differences in the cow diet composition.Upland (or mountain) areas are characterized by considerable limitations in land-use possibilities mainly due to the difficult climatic conditions, the unsuitability of surfaces for machinery, or a combination of these 2 factors that result in an increase in the cost of farming practices ( Several studies have highlighted a specific composition of commercial dairy products from upland origin. Upland milk showed higher n-3 fatty acid ( The specific sensory properties ( Taking advantage of a large-scale, transnational on-farm experiment, the aims of this research were to determine the effect of upland origin on milk composition when comparing similar lowland and upland production systems and to highlight the relative weight of the factors responsible for the specific composition of upland milk from commercial farms. The experiment was designed to separate the effect of production in upland areas (upland origin At each tanker milk sampling, the herd characteristics and performance (number of cows, DIM, and milk yield), diet composition for the lactating cows and altitude of the farm were collected through surveys on each farm that delivered milk to a collected tanker, as described by The tanker milk sampling and analyses were detailed by The FA were directly methylated in lyophilized milk (Thermovac TM-20, Froilabo S.A., Meyzieu, France) according to The analysis of minerals was performed on thawed milk. Sample preparation and mineral extraction were described by Milk color was determined through a Minolta CR310 chromameter (Minolta France S.A., Carrières-sur-Seine, France), according to To determine β-carotene, 200 µL of milk was diluted in 1,200 µL of 2-propanol containing the internal standard astaxanthin, and butylated hydroxytoluene ( The vitamin A content of the milk was determined as described by The analysis of milk vitamin E was performed by diluting 1 mL of milk with 3 mL of 2-propanol containing the internal standard tocopherol and BHT as an antioxidant. After 15 min of mixing followed by centrifugation (10 min, 4,000 × Milk UV-absorbing compounds were extracted with acetonitrile, adapting the procedure of The milk VOC profile was analyzed by solid-phase microextraction ( Statistical analysis of the data related to milk composition was performed with SAS software (version 8.6, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). The experimental design allowed treatment of all the data for production conditions and milk composition by ANOVA using a mixed model, in which the season, forage system, and origin were the fixed factors and the sampling period nested within the season was the repeated factor. The tanker round was used as the statistical unit. At each sampling period, survey data collected from the farms belonging to a tanker were averaged and the mean value was attributed to the tanker. All the interactions (namely, season × forage system, season × origin, forage system × origin, and season × forage system × origin) were also included in the model. The Fisher's  Season significantly affected several milk constituents. The milk produced during the outdoor season was the richest in vitamins E and A, C18:0, branched-chain fatty acids ( The concentrate proportion of the cow diet was lower during the outdoor than the indoor season (19 vs. 23% on a DM basis). The forage system significantly affected the concentrations of most of the milk constituents. The tanker round milk from the farms that adopted a grass-based forage system was richer in C18:0, C18:3n-3, BCFA, cymene isomer, α-thujene, β-citronellene, sabinene, α-copaene, caparratriene, iso-caryophyllene, β-caryophyllene, α-humulene, and 10,10-dimethyl-4-acetyl-tricyclo[5.2.1.0(1,5)]decane, had a higher C18:1 The proportions of concentrates was lower (18 vs. 24% of diet DM). Upland and lowland milks were globally similar, except for the concentrations of not identified ( Several significant interactions were observed for both milk constituents and production conditions for season and forage system effects, whereas only a few significant interactions were observed between the effect of origin and the other factors. Season affected differently several milk constituents according to the forage system ( Season affected differently some milk constituents according to their origin ( Only a few variables showed a significant interaction between the forage system and the origin of production ( Only 3 milk constituents showed a significant interaction between season, forage system, and origin (   In contrast to the results from the literature comparing lowland and upland dairy products ( The botanical composition of upland pastures could as well be at the origin of the difference we observed in the FA profile between upland and lowland milk during the outdoor season. The richness in secondary metabolite (i.e., terpenes and polyphenols) of the forbs, abundant on upland pastures, can partially inhibit the ruminal biohydrogenation of dietary FA, resulting in a milk richer in C18:3n-3, CLA Out of the few compounds showing a significant effect of origin or its interaction, most of the milk constituents were unaffected by the origin at all. Furthermore, even the affected constituents showed a low relevance of the origin or of the interactions with origin, compared with the relevance of season and feeding system effects or interactions ( The effect of feeding systems on milk composition has been largely studied, and the results from the literature are consistent with our findings ( The cow diet composition (i.e., forage proportion, type and conservation mode, and concentrate amount; A new finding of this study was the positive correlation found in on farm conditions between the fresh herbage proportion in the cow diet and the concentration of n.i. Rt 51.89 UV-absorbing compounds, as well as its negative correlation with corn silage and concentrate proportions in the cow diet. This unidentified compound was associated with pasture feeding for the first time by As the effect of the feeding system on milk composition was largely expected, we specifically built our experimental design to compare lowland and upland milks derived from similar forage systems. This has therefore minimized the differences between upland and lowland groups, which were indeed smaller than expected. It is, however, important to clarify that our results do not call into question the specific composition of upland milk reported by many authors because, in practice, the dominant forage system applied in uplands is very different from that in lowlands. Indeed, when considering the farming system in European upland areas, permanent grasslands consist of 59% of the used agricultural surface (vs. 33% on average in the EU). These surfaces often cannot allow any different cultivations and are the basis for ruminant feeding in upland areas ( When comparing upland and lowland milk derived from similar forage systems and seasons, this study highlighted that the upland origin per se affected the content of only a few milk constituents. Furthermore, this study allowed to hierarchize the effects related to the origin on milk composition that can be considered as marginal when compared with the effect of season and forage system. However, when significant, the origin effects could be attributable to specific characteristics of upland pasture or derived forages. The authors thank the dairy producers in France, Slovakia, and Slovenia for their participation in this study and the French dairy industry, France Contrôle Elevage (Paris, France), Chamber of Agriculture of France (Paris, France), Chamber of Agriculture and Forestry of Slovenia (Ljubljana), and INRA (Paris, France) for their help in milk sampling and farm data collection. Thanks are also due to the France Contrôle Elevage (Paris, France) and Central Cattle Breeding Database (Ljubljana, Slovenia) for free access to the data used in this study. This study was part of the European Research Program Truefood no. 16264 and was funded by the European Commission within the Sixth Framework Program. The work in Slovenia was also co-financed by The Slovenian Ministry of Agriculture and Environment and The Ministry of Education, Science and Sport (V4-0517 and P4-0133; Ljubljana). The French Fonds National d'Aménagement et de Développement du Territoire (FNADT; Lyon, France), the Conseils Régionaux d'Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes (Toulouse, France), de Nouvelle Aquitaine et d'Occitanie (Bordeaux, France), and Conseils départementaux Aveyron (Rodez, France), Creuse (Gueret, France), Corrèze (Tulle, France), Lozère (Mende, France), Haute-Loire (Le Puy-en-Velay, France), and Puy-de-Dôme (Clermont-Ferrand, France) contributed to the funding. The authors acknowledge the Association des Producteurs de Lait de Montagne (APLM; Rodez, France) and the French government's Initiative D'Excellence and Initiative Science-Innovation-Territoires-Économie (IDEX-ISITE; Paris, France) initiative 16-IDEX-0001 (CAP 20-25) for fruitful discussions. We would like to thank Magaly Angénieux and Nathalie Kondjoyan from the MASS group (INRA-QuaPA) for technical assistance in the VOC analysis and Isabelle Constant (INRA-UMR Herbivores) for assistance in milk sampling, management, farm surveys, and elaboration of part of the data. A special thanks also to Claire Agabriel to her transversal contribution to the whole project and to Odd Magne Harstad for the carotenoids analysis. The authors also thank American Journal Experts Support Team (Durham, NC) for the language revision.