The use of in-seam waves for void detection in mines requires the capability of capturing high frequency signals over large distances. For instance, the Airy phase of Love waves which are used for void detection in coal mines ranges from several hundred to over one thousand Hertz and the expected travel distance of these signals is at least 90m (equivalent to a detection distance of 45m) for the technique to be considered practical. In order to obtain high quality and broadband signals, sensors are conventionally grouted at the bottom of boreholes so that the attenuation due to the fractured surface is minimized and the coupling effect is improved. However, to be economically feasible, the expensive and high sensitive sensors must be retrievable so that they can be used repeatedly at the same or other locations. Because of these concerns, a retrievable sensor installation technique was developed. This paper provides a detailed review of the technique as well as a brief discussion of its applications. The technique is simple and reliable for both installation and retrieval operations and can be used for boreholes oriented in any directions. The technique has been demonstrated in over 200 sensor installation/retrieval operations under various borehole conditions, including bituminous coal, anthracite coal, shale, sandstone and trona. With this technique, we were able to detect the high frequency signals required for our projects. For instance, the signals used at a trona mine for void detection have a typical frequency of 5kHz with the travel distance of 150–200m. The results of these operations have shown that sensors installed in the prescribed manner exhibit predictable, consistent, and repeatable performance. The technique also provides an economical and reliable means for many other field seismic monitoring applications where high quality and broadband signals are essential, such as microseismic monitoring and geotomography studies.Geophysical methods, such as microseismic monitoring, geotomography, and in-seam seismic techniques, become increasingly significant in rock mechanics and mining engineering in recent decades ( The operational principle of the in-seam wave based void detection technique is illustrated in A critical component of this technique is sensor installation. To be a technique capable of void detection, it must be able to detect high frequency signals over large distances. For instance, the Airy phase of Love waves which are used for void detection in coal mines ranges from several hundred to over one thousand Hertz. For the technique to be considered practical for the purpose of mine safety, it must be able to detect these high frequency signals with a travel distance of at least 90 In order to solve these problems, a retrievable sensor installation technique was developed. With this technique, sensors can be installed as if they were grouted and retreated after the seismic survey. This paper provides a detailed review of the technique as well as a brief discussion of its applications. A retrievable uniaxial sensor consists of two parts: a sensor body and a screw assembly ( The retrievable sensor installation technique has three components: epoxy, installation devices and field work procedure. Epoxy is used to grout sensor anchors at the borehole bottom. Installation devices include the hardware used for sensor installation: an epoxy mixing device, installation assembly and installation tool kit. The field work procedure is a guideline for sensor-hole preparation and sensor installation. An important method used to quantify the retrievable sensor installation technique is the pull-out test. This test measures the pull-out load, which is the amount of force needed to pull the anchor out of the borehole. The pull-out test provides a quantitative means to evaluate the adequacy of materials, devices and processes selected for the technique. Because of its basic role in the development of the retrievable sensor installation technique, the pull-out test will be discussed first. The development of the retrievable sensor installation technique requires the quantitative evaluation of a wide range of issues, including material properties, device design, and the installation process. For instance, in order to select a suitable grouting material, one needs to evaluate its anchorage strength, curing time, epoxy quantity, mixing procedure, and compatibility with the borehole material. The pull-out test was developed for these evaluation purposes. The pull-out test has three basic components: test specimens, test devices, and the testing procedure. A test specimen consists of three parts: a blank simulating the borehole bottom, a screw assembly, and epoxy for grouting purposes ( A test blank with the standard size is shown in Blanks may be made of different materials depending on the purpose of the test. Other than for the compatibility testing of borehole material and epoxy type, concrete may be used for most purposes. Commercially available concrete blocks are an acceptable choice as raw material for concrete blanks ( In order to determine the load required to pull the screw assembly out of the blank, a device is needed to hold the specimen during the tensile test. The jig shown in During the test, the test jig is attached in a tensile loading frame ( Sensor anchors are grouted in boreholes with epoxy. Since the coupling effect for retrievable sensors is primarily determined by how well the screw assembly is anchored, a suitable type of epoxy is critical for the retrievable sensor installation technique. An important factor associated with selection and testing of epoxy is the curing stages. An epoxy normally consists of two parts: epoxy resin and catalyst (hardener). Mixing these two parts initiates a chemical reaction that transforms the combined ingredients to a solid. The time required for this transformation is called the curing time. There are three general stages of curing: open time (liquid), initial cure (gel), and final cure (solid). (1) Open time (liquid) Open time is the portion of the curing time immediately after mixing. During this time, the resin/hardener mixture remains in its initial state, either liquid or paste, and is workable and suitable for application. Open time is therefore the time period that one is able to work with the epoxy. For this reason, the open time is also called working time. All assembly and clamping should take place during the open time to assure a dependable bond. For sensor installation, this means that the sensor anchor must be in place before the end of the working time. (2) Initial cure (gel) The mixture passes into an initial cure phase (also called the green stage) when it begins to gel. The epoxy is no longer workable and will no longer feel tacky. During this stage, the epoxy progresses from a soft gel consistency to the firmness of hard rubber. The gel or initial curing time is also critical for sensor installation. After the sensor is installed at the bottom of the borehole, the epoxy should be able to hold the sensor quickly, within 1 or 2 (3) Final cure (solid) The final cure indicates that the epoxy mixture has cured to a solid state and can be dry sanded and shaped. At this point, the epoxy has reached approximately 90% of its ultimate strength, however, the material will continue to cure for several days. There are many high strength epoxies available. Three commonly used types of epoxies (gel type, paste type, and rock bolt resin) are shown in The suitable epoxy is selected based on a number of factors. In addition to anchoring strength, the operational properties, such as mixing time, curing time, and handling convenience, are also important. All three types of epoxies were evaluated in terms of these criteria and the results are summarized in Based on the evaluation of these results, Lokset 90-second resin was selected for both high anchorage strength and favorable operational properties. PC-7 heavy duty epoxy and Devcon 2-ton gel epoxy were rejected largely due to the operational difficulties. The main problem for PC-7 heavy duty epoxy is the prolonged curing time. In addition, the pull-out load for PC-7 heavy duty epoxy is only 370 After Lokset resin was selected, its curing properties were further studied and tested in order to establish an appropriate time line for the installation procedure. It is understood from the earlier discussion that, for the best bonding effect, grouting has to be completed within the working time of the epoxy. For sensor installation, the working time covers two operations: mixing the epoxy and installing the sensor anchor in place at the borehole bottom. During the anchoring process, the epoxy is squeezed from its container to the borehole bottom, which, mechanically, is another mixing process. To assure a dependable bond, the time that is actually required for the work should be shorter than specified working time. For instance, the actual time allocated to work with Lokset 90-second resin has been limited to a total of about 1 The initial curing time (gel time) begins when the epoxy is not workable. During this stage, the epoxy progresses from a soft gel consistency to the firmness of hard rubber. The initial curing time is particularly important for reliable sensor installation. When the sensor anchor is placed at the bottom of the borehole by the installation kit, the epoxy is still workable. The anchor will be pressed continuously through the installation bar. To avoid any further mixing caused by the instability of the pressing force, it is highly desirable that the epoxy hardens quickly to maintain the anchor in place without external forces. Instability resulting from prolonged external pressure applied through the installation bar could severely reduce the bonding strength. One of the most important reasons to use Lokset 90-second resin is due to its very short hardening time, approximately 1–2 minutes. Because of this, the installation kit can be released few minutes after the sensor is installed. The initial curing time can be easily obtained by observing the hardness of the resin in the test blank. This time can be also confirmed by the curing time required to reach 90% of the strength. Normally, the duration of the curing time is 5–6 times the duration of the gel time.  The anchorage strength of an epoxy is also affected by the characteristics of the borehole materials. The compatibility between an epoxy and borehole materials is evaluated by the pull-out tests with the blanks fabricated from potential borehole materials. The pull-out load for coal is low, especially for bituminous coal. This is primarily due to heavily fractured coal samples, which often lead to a premature failure of test blanks. For this reason, the pull-out load values for coal given in The function of the installation devices is to install sensor anchors, and to mount and dismount sensors. The installation devices include the resin mixing device, the sensor installation assembly and the installation/retrieval tool kit. The following is a brief discussion of these devices as well as the design considerations. The strength of any two-part resin depends on how well it is mixed within the working time. A suitable mixing device is therefore important for the efficient and reliable installation operation. The Lokset resin has a very high viscosity and, therefore, the mixing device must be relatively strong. Various kitchen blenders, seemingly ideal by appearance, are not practical to mix Lockset resin. In searching for a simple and efficient means, three methods were tested: mixing by hand, grinder and hardwood dowel. The basic tools for hand mixing are stiff spoons and forks. This method is simple, but it is difficult to achieve a consistent performance. The grinder method utilizes a rigid kitchen grinder ( The dowel method uses hardwood dowels with custom prepared mixing ends ( A sensor installation assembly, as shown in From an operational point of view, the central part of the installation assembly is the cup for holding the epoxy. The size of the cup must be compatible with the borehole size and adequate for holding the required quantity of epoxy. In addition to the size, the mechanical properties of the cup are also important. Ideally, the cup should be both strong enough to transport epoxy to the bottom of the borehole and weak or fragile enough to allow the free “flow” of the epoxy out of the cup during the anchoring process. The installation/retrieval tool kit consists of two parts: a sensor grabbing socket and a set of extensible rods. The extensible rods have a handle and are made of high strength aluminum ( An important and unique feature of the sensor grabbing socket is a throughout-cut. This design made it possible to connect directly to the sensor ( A high quality installation of retrievable sensors relies on not only the suitable epoxy and installation devices, but also on the well prepared sensor holes and an error free installation procedure. To assure installation quality, sensor-holes have to be well prepared. The condition of the boreholes must be carefully examined in terms of borehole length, diameter, inclination, orientation, flatness of bottom, and the absence of dust. The following is a brief discussion of these factors. Borehole clearing Dust in boreholes must be cleaned thoroughly. Dust remaining in boreholes will be wiped to the borehole end by the sensor assembly during installation. A buffer of dust between the hole end and the sensor may severely weaken the coupling quality. Compressed air is ideal for sensor hole cleaning. A tank of compressed nitrogen may be used if compressed air is not available. Borehole depth In order to achieve the best coupling effect, the borehole bottom should be beyond the highly fractured zone. The depth of the highly fractured zone is affected by many factors and varies from location to location. Studies on pillar stress have shown that the highly fractured zone is normally less than half of the pillar height. Borehole diameter The borehole diameter is determined by two factors: the diameter of the sensor and the clearance required for installing and retrieving the sensor. We typically use 4.44 Borehole orientation The effect of the borehole orientation on the underlying study must be evaluated. An important consideration is to facilitate polarization analysis. Borehole end condition The borehole end should be flat and clean to ensure the installation quality. A suitable drill bit has to be used for this purpose. Inclination It is always a good practice to have boreholes slightly inclined upwards to avoid the problem of water accumulation. Sensor installation is a collaborative work by a group of people and involves many different operations. To ensure an errorless installation operation, the following procedure should be closely followed. Step 1: borehole inspection After a borehole is selected for the sensor installation, the first step is to check its condition, including cleanness, borehole surface, depth, and water. Step 2: preparing sensor installation assembly The next step is to prepare the sensor installation assembly. A sensor installation assembly consists of a sensor, a screw assembly and two cups. Make sure that the sensor is the one specified for the borehole by design, and that the sensor is tightly connected to the screw assembly. Step 3: preparing the installation kit When preparing the installation kit, make sure that the length of the connected rods is compatible with the sensor hole and the pins are in place. Step 4: borehole testing Mount the installation assembly to the socket of the installation kit and insert the sensor installation assembly into the borehole to see if there is any difficulty for the assembly reaching to the borehole bottom. If there is a difficulty, find the reason and correct the problem. Step 5: resin mixing preparation Assemble all of the mixing elements in the location where the mixing will occur, including resin cartridge, dowels, bowl, scissors, and timer. Step 6: mixing process Start timer: resin should be well mixed within 40 Step 7: placing resin to holding cup Place the proper amount of resin to the holding cup. Excessive or insufficient resin may severely affect the installation quality. Step 8: sensor installation Immediately take the sensor installation assembly to the borehole, gently send it to the borehole bottom, push it firmly after it reaches to the bottom to squeeze the resin out of the cup, hold the installation rod under pressure for 5 Step 9: sound barrier Use suitable insulation material to plug the borehole as the sound barrier. Play-Doh is ideal for this purpose according to our experience. Step 10: data recording Immediately after the installation, record the following data items: sensor number, borehole number, channel number used in data acquisition system, time of the installation, remarks on any problems encountered. Sensor retrieval utilizes the same tool that is used for sensor installation, but is a much simpler process. The first step is to remove the sound barrier from the borehole. The next step is to send the installation kit to the borehole. When the installation kit reaches to the sensor, gently rotate the installation kit until it grabs the sensor connection head ( This section discusses some of the laboratory and field test results of the technique, as well as the simulation facility used for the laboratory test. Because of its fundamental effect on signal quality, sensor installation is one of the most important field operations. A particularly demanding aspect of this field operation is that there is almost no room for error. If an installation is improperly done, that borehole has to be abandoned. One cannot repair or redo it. Therefore, every caution has to be taken to ensure the sensor is correctly installed. A simulation facility was developed for this purpose.  The simulation facility with the illustrated design provides a near-real condition for sensor installation and provides the installer with the experience, skill and confidence for field installations. Another important usage of the simulation facility is to facilitate the large block test, a laboratory test which allows one to study the anchorage condition at the borehole end. One of the shortcomings of the pull-out test is that it may underestimate the anchorage strength for weak and fractured materials because of the blanks’ thin wall. A solution to this problem is to test the pull-out load for anchors installed in large blocks of the actual material. A particular benefit of this test is that it also allows a direct inspection of the quality of installation, thus providing a rare opportunity to evaluate the effectiveness of the installation technique and procedure objectively. A process of a large block test is shown in The retrievable sensor installation technique has been utilized at 7 mine sites. Over 200 sensor installation/retrieval operations have been carried out under various borehole conditions, including bituminous coal, anthracite coal, shale, sandstone and trona. Among these 200 operations, 50 were repeat operations, that is, the sensors were reinstalled in the sensor-holes that had been used and then removed again after the seismic survey. The performance of the technique may be assessed from two aspects: operational efficiency as a tool and signal quality provided by the technique. From an operational perspective, the technique is simple and convenient. The technique performed as expected even under difficult conditions, such as low seam and wet floor. Typically, with a three-man crew, sensor installation is completed in 8 The success of the retrievable sensor installation technique is demonstrated by its capability of acquiring high quality and broadband signals on a consistent basis. Such an example is given in In order to demonstrate the reliability and repeatability of the in-seam seismic technique and the retrievable sensor installation technique, these techniques were tested twice at a trona mine site. The first test was carried out in March, 2005. After the test, all sensors were uninstalled and shipped to other mine sites for the test. The second test was held in August of the same year, which was an official demonstration test for US Mine Health and Safety Administration (MSHA). MSHA is the US government agency responsible for the mine health and safety.  The waveform presented in Sensor installation is a critical component of the in-seam wave based void detection technique. To be a technique capable of void detection, it has to be able to detect high frequency signals over large distances. This usually requires grouting entire sensors in boreholes to achieve better coupling effects. However, to be economically feasible, sensors must be retrievable as the high sensitive sensors used for void detection are quite expensive. The retrievable sensor installation technique was developed to address these concerns. The three main components for the retrievable sensor installation technique are epoxy, installation devices, and field work procedure. The recommended epoxy is Lokset 90-second rock bolt resin. An important tool used for the development of this sensor installation technique is the pull-out test which provides a quantitative means to assess various parameters. The other important part of the retrievable sensor installation technique is the simulation facility which is used for sensor installation training and evaluation of in-situ anchorage strength. The retrievable sensor installation technique has been tested extensively for various borehole conditions. It is simple and easy to use. The experience has shown that sensors installed in the prescribed manner have exhibited predictable, consistent, and repeatable performance. The success of the retrievable sensor installation technique is demonstrated by its capability of acquiring high quality and broadband signals on a consistent basis. In addition to the in-seam wave based void detection technique, the retrievable sensor installation technique has also demonstrated advantages for use in microseismic monitoring and geotomography studies. First, the application of the technique is quite simple once it is adopted. As it has been stated earlier, with a three-man crew, sensor installation is completed in 8 We thank two anonymous reviewers for their comments and suggestions to improve the manuscript.