Milk production strategies focusing on longevity and limited use of concentrate are receiving increasing attention. To evaluate such strategies, knowledge of the development with age of animal characteristics, particularly digestion, is indispensable. We therefore investigated the development of feed intake, chewing activity, and digestion in 30 lactating Brown Swiss cows (876–3,648 d old) and 12 heifers (199–778 d old). We also studied whether age effects were exhibited differently in animals selected from herds subjected for 11 yr either to a forage-only or to a forage-concentrate feeding regimen. Forages consisted of grass hay (the only feed for heifers), corn silage, and grass pellets. Measurements lasted for 8 d, where amounts and composition of feeds, feces, and milk were recorded and analyzed. Ruminal pH data and eating and rumination activity were assessed by pH sensors put into the rumen and halter-mounted noseband sensors. The mean retention time of feed particles was assessed using Cr-mordanted fiber and data were used to calculate dry matter gut fill. Data were subjected to regression analyses with age and feeding regimen as explanatory variables, and body weight, milk yield, and proportion of hay in forage as covariates. This allowed separating age-related changes of body weight and milk yield from independent age effects and correcting for differences in preference for individual forages. In cows, organic matter intake increased with age (from slightly below to above 20kg/d), as did mean retention time and gut fill. Digestibility of organic matter did not show a clear age dependency, but fiber digestibility had a maximum in cows of around 4 to 6 yr of age. Ruminal pH and absolute eating and rumination times did not vary with cow age. Young and old cows chewed regurgitated boluses more intensively (60–70 times) than middle-aged cows (about 50 times). Effects of feeding regimen were small, except for fiber intake and rumination time per unit of intake, owing to the different fiber content of the diets. No significant interactions between age and feeding regimen were found. Heifers spent more time eating and ruminating per unit of feed than cows, which resulted in a high fiber digestibility. Irrespective of the feeding regimen tested, older cows maintained intake and digestion efficiency with longer retention times and chewing rumination boluses more intensively. The results support efforts to extend the length of productive life in dairy cows.Milk production by dairy cows has been globally intensified by favoring genotypes with high daily milk yields ( To develop strategies for sustainable dairy production based on an increased length of productive life, knowledge about nutrient intake and digestion characteristics of animals at higher ages is indispensable. Results from Therefore, the objective of the present study was to determine if any changes in digestion occurred with age in dairy cattle continuously distributed over a large age range. Age effects were tested in 2 different feeding regimens (zero concentrate diet vs. control diet including concentrate). As a first step, nutrient intakes as well as feeding and digestion characteristics in heifers and cows of different ages (0.5–10 yr) were investigated. Three hypotheses were tested. (1) Dairy cattle increase their intake capacity with age, which allows them to increase intake without compromising ruminal fermentation conditions, digesta retention, and digestibility. (2) As chewing efficiency changes with age, cattle show a curvilinear development of chewing and rumination activity. (3) The age effect depends on the feeding regimen. The age-related changes were expected to go beyond the more obvious ones occurring from the transition from the heifer state (nonlactating) to primiparous cows and the subsequent transition from primiparous to multiparous cows. As a second step, methane emissions and efficiency were investigated as decisive criteria for environmental sustainability of longevity strategies in dairy production (described in Grandl et al., 2016). The experiment, carried out from October 2013 to February 2014, was approved by the veterinary office of the Swiss canton of Zurich (149/2013). Thirty lactating cows and 12 heifers of the Brown Swiss breed were selected from the 2 herds of the Agricultural Education and Advisory Centre Plantahof (Landquart, Switzerland). These herds were managed with different feeding regimens since 2003, and replacement was exclusively done within feeding regimen. Concentrate was completely omitted in one feeding regimen ( The animals (including the nonlactating heifers) were selected to achieve a maximum age spectrum and were balanced for feeding regimens and DIM. The age range covered a span from 199 to 3,648 d for CTRL and 310 to 3,640 d for 0-CONC (weaned calves to cows in the seventh lactation; details given in During the experiment, feeding and milking took place along with the normal routine applied to all cows. Periods of feeding were from 0300 to 0800 Body weight was measured on a pallet scale on the first day of the 8-d collection period. During the collection period, milk yield was recorded at each milking using a mechanical milk meter (Tru-Test Limited, Auckland, New Zealand). From each milking, Bronopol-conserved samples were collected and analyzed for fat, protein, and lactose by a Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (MilkoScan FT6000, Foss, Hillerød, Denmark) at the Swiss routine milk analysis laboratory (Suisselab AG, Zollikofen, Switzerland). The ECM was calculated based on the The chewing activity of all animals was monitored with noseband sensors (MSR Electronics, Seuzach, Switzerland; For continuous measurement of ruminal pH, 14 lactating cows (7 per regimen; i.e., approximately every second experimental cow) were equipped with an indwelling sensor bolus (smaXtec animal care GmbH, Graz, Austria) as described by Chromium-mordanted fiber was used as particle marker for determination of passage time. For that purpose, grass hay was dried and ground with a cutting mill to pass an 8-mm screen. The material was then dry screened to obtain material with a particle size of between 1 and 2 Hay and corn silage were sampled at the beginning and the end of each run of 6 animals. The grass pellets and the 2 concentrates were sampled twice during the entire experiment. Samples of leftovers from each animal were collected twice per day during the 8-d collection period. The samples were immediately dried at 60°C to constant weight and ground to pass a 1-mm screen of either a cutting mill or centrifugal mill (concentrate) for later analyses. During the sampling period, the entire feces were collected in polypropylene trays placed at the rear end of the tiestalls. Urine was separated from feces using urinals attached around the vulva of the cows and fixed by hook-and-loop fastener straps glued (Cyanolit 202, Panacol Elosol GmbH, Steinbach, Germany) onto the skin. Representative samples of feces proportional to the amounts excreted were taken from the trays at least twice a day and the total daily amount of excreted feces was recorded and a fixed proportion (0.3 and 0.6% in cows and heifers, respectively) was immediately frozen. Samples were composited per cow and collection period. Additional fecal samples (approximately 100 Feeds and feces were analyzed according to standard procedures ( The apparent digestibility ( Assuming a linear absorption of nutrients during MRT ( Data of the nonlactating heifers were analyzed separately applying a regression model that included feeding regimen and age as effects. The reason for the separate analysis was that potential age effects in heifers are presumed to have a different biological background compared with a potential age effect in adult cows. In heifers, it is mainly driven by the growth and development of the juvenile animal, whereas the age effect in adult cattle is expected to be related to senescence. Additionally, the diet (hay only) was different from that of the cows, and the covariates ECM yield and hay proportion used in the cow regressions were not applicable to the heifer data. This also applies to BW, which is naturally highly colinear with age in growing heifers. Given that the same diet was fed to heifers from both regimens, significant feeding regimen differences in heifers would indicate genuine effects from the 11 yr (2003–2014) of selection within feeding regimen. However, as a significant feeding regimen effect was never present in the heifers, heifer data are presented across both feeding regimens. The medians of heifer and cow data were compared with the Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney rank sum tests. Adjusted means for the feeding regimens were calculated with the effects package ( The actual diet composition of the lactating cows marginally deviated from that anticipated. In detail, the intakes of hay (provided ad libitum) and of corn silage were slightly smaller than intended for both feeding regimens ( The MRT of the particulate matter did not differ between feeding The apparent digestibility of OM tended to be lower in 0-CONC compared with CTRL cows, but the feeding regimen did not affect aD of NDF ( The mean ruminal pH and the times when the pH was below 6.0 or 5.8 did not differ between feeding regimens ( Absolute eating time in cows was not related to age or feeding regimen, but was significantly increased with a greater hay proportion in forage ( The heifers expressed a greater variation in eating and rumination times than the cows when the times were related to DM or NDF intake ( To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study describing feeding and digestion characteristics of dairy cattle with age continuously distributed over a wide range and explicitly focusing on cows from herds that were adapted for a long time to 2 distinct feeding strategies. Age effects were corrected for different BW and ECM yield in cows and for individual variability All age-dependent changes, such as increasing OMI, MRT, changing fiber digestibility, and changing chewing behavior described above, were similarly expressed in both feeding regimens (i.e., no significant interaction effect of age and feeding regimen was observed). This was unexpected, because dietary fiber differed and could have been more limiting for one than for the other feeding regimen. It remains an open question whether more contrasting diets would have had provoked different responses with age. Organic matter intake is a close reflection of nutrient intake; results on DMI can be found in Grandl et al. (2016). The known lower intake of primiparous compared with multiparous cows (e.g., Along with the increasing OMI, older cows also had a longer MRT than younger cows. This is contrary to reports in literature, where greater feed intake is often associated with decreasing MRT (e.g., Heifers on the hay-only diet had, on average, approximately 7 Daily eating times were largely constant across the observed age range. However, when related to intake, the time spent for eating per unit of intake decreased with age; this happened steeply in heifers and moderately in cows. Shorter chewing times per unit of feed in multiparous compared with primiparous cows were also observed by In the heifers, no differences in intake and digestion characteristics according to their feeding regimen origin were observed. This indicates that the feeding regimen effect found in the cows was actually an effect of the diet and not an effect of selecting for cows adapted to the respective feeding regimen. Such a potential effect was also weakened by using the same sires for AI in the breeding groups of the 2 feeding regimens. For cows across both feeding regimens, OM and fiber intake was in the range of other studies (e.g., In the present study, significant age effects were noted in feeding, ruminating, and digestion characteristics in dairy cattle. Older cows were able to ingest more yet maintained digestion efficiency to a large extent and seemed to adapt their eating and ruminating activity to their ability of fiber degradation. Additionally, older cows appeared to select against fiber-containing particles. The reasons for several of these changes with age still need to be explored in more detail, but could include learning from experiences in feeding and ruminating behavior. There might also be anatomic changes taking place, such as the changing morphology of the teeth over time. The assumption that age effects could be differently exhibited with different diet types was rejected given the diets investigated. In general, diet effects of the 2 feeding regimens on traits describing intake and digestion were less pronounced than expected, possibly because forage quality was very high in the present experiment. Overall, the current results support efforts to increase the length of the productive life in dairy cows as, at least in the age range investigated, no negative developments with age were found. The authors are grateful for the support of the institutions and persons involved in the experiment: Plantahof (A. Accola, D. Balestra, C. Brandenburger, K. Freuler, J. Jenewein, P. Küchler), ETH Zurich (S. Marquardt, R. Messikommer), the lab teams at ETH and IZW (C. Kunz, M. Mergani, P. Stirnemann, E. Wenk, H. Barleben). Special thanks go to M. Kalisch (ETH Zurich) and M. Dolezal (University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna) for their assistance in the statistical analysis. The project was supported by