A numerical approach is presented to study the explosion-induced pressure load on an underground rock chamber wall and its resultant damage to the rock chamber. Numerical simulations are carried out by using a modified version of the commercial software AUTODYN. Three different criteria, i.e. a peak particle velocity (PPV) criterion, an effective strain (ES) criterion, and a damage criterion, are employed to examine the explosion-induced damaged zones of the underground rock chamber. The results show that the charge chamber geometry, coupling condition and charge configuration affect significantly the dynamic pressure exerted on the rock chamber wall. Thus the chamber is damaged. An inaccurate approximation of pressure boundary ignoring the influences of these factors would result in an erroneous prediction of damaged area and damage intensity of the charge chamber. The PPV criterion yields the largest damaged zone while the ES criterion gives the smallest one. The presented numerical simulation method is superior in consideration of the chamber geometry, loading density, coupling condition and rock quality. The predicted damage intensity of rock mass can be categorized quantitatively by an isotropic damage scalar. Safe separation distance of adjacent chambers for a specific charge weight is also estimated.The existing empirical methods for predicting the explosion-induced damaged zone around underground rock chambers Numerous field tests have been conducted to characterize rock damage resulting from explosion- induced load In a previous study The commercial software AUTODYN has the feature of simulating detonation process directly, which saves the effort to derive the explosion-induced wall pressure. In the context, an Euler processor is used for the flowable TNT equivalent and the chamber void. Solid rock mass is modeled mathematically by a Lagrange processor. An Eulerian subgrid and a Lagrangian subgrid may interact through an Euler- Lagrange interface. In the Euler-Lagrange interface, the Lagrangian subgrid acts as a geometric constraint to the Eulerian subgrid, while the Eulerian subgrid provides a pressure boundary to the Lagrangian subgrid. As the Lagrangian subgrid moves and distorts, it covers and uncovers the fixed Eulerian cells. The software utilizes a sophisticated logic to avoid overly small Eulerian cells that may arise during this process. Small Eulerian cells, which could severely limit the calculational timestep, are automatically blended with larger neighbors. The Euler-Lagrange interface allows complex fluid-structure interaction problems to be solved as well as the large deformation structural problems. Some details of the interaction algorithm of the Eulerian and Lagrangian cells can be found in Donea et al. The partial differential equations to be solved represent the conservations of mass, momentum and energy in the Lagrangian coordinates. These, together with a material model and a set of initial and boundary conditions, define the complete equations governing the problem. Material associated with a Lagrangian zone stays with that zone at any deformation. Thus, a Lagrangian grid moves and distorts with the material it models, and conservation of mass is automatically satisfied. The density at any time can be determined from the current volume of the zone and its initial mass. In order to avoid hourglass to happen, a set of corrective forces are added to the solution In the study, the chamber wall is modeled as a separating boundary, which restrains the flow of Eulerian subgrid. The pressure due to the explosive energy release interacts with the chamber wall and thus produces stress wave in the surrounding rock mass. The simulation is initiated by the assignment of a detonation point on the meshed explosive. The high- energy TNT equivalent and the air filling chamber are modeled by the Jones-Wilkens-Lee (JWL) equation-of- state and the ideal gas equation-of-state, respectively, which are available in the material library of the software The calibration process of the numerical model has been done by simulating two small-scale field tests A piecewise linear Drucker-Prager failure criterion is used in the present study. It has the following form: where (1) Cutoff hydro-tensile strength f (2) Uniaxial tensile strength f (3) Uniaxial compressive strength f (4) Confined compressive strengths The uniaxial compressive strength where Since damage and plastic flow may occur simultaneously, the yield strength decreases with the degradation of stiffness. Assuming that the post-failure of rock material satisfies isotropic softening rule, then, if where Damage of high quality granite where The damage scalar is then directly defined as where Thus, if the equivalent tensile strain exceeds the critical value The configuration of underground explosion simulated in the context is schematically shown in Interaction between the explosion-induced pressure wave and the solid rock chamber wall is very complicated. Different waveforms, i.e. overpressure, reflected pressure and transmitted pressure, may be used to characterize the effect of the shock wave on the chamber wall. The overpressure propagating in free-air attenuates following a cubic root rule of the direct distance for a given charge weight. Away from the charge center, the time-history overpressure has the shape shown in Traditional simulations of underground explosion generally use a simplified configuration of the charge chamber such as the one shown in In the spherical charge condition, the present numerically simulated reflected pressure and transmitted pressure generated by a 250-t TNT explosive with a loading density of 10 kg/m However, when the charge chamber section is rectangular ( The present numerical method using the modified version of AUTODYN is then applied to an underground rock chamber detonated by a 250-t TNT explosive. The cover thickness is again expressed as 1.0Q For a plane wave, the particle velocity (v) and the effective strain has the following relation: Where έ  When the chamber height changes to 20 m while the charge weight and the loading density remain 250 t and 10 kg/m The major damaged zones based on the proposed criterion (D > 0.22) in the study for the two cases are shown in  To consider the influence of explosive distribution, two chambers with different charge distributions are investigated. In the first chamber, a 100-t TNT is placed at the center of the floor and another 150-t TNT is placed in a ring with a radius of 10 m on the floor. In the second chamber, all the 250-t charge is distributed in a ring with a radius of 10 m on the floor. The derived damaged zones for the 10 m-high chamber are shown in The results demonstrate that numerical prediction of rock mass damaged areas based on the proposed damage model is comparable with the results based on the empirical criteria (PPV and ES criteria). The two empirical criteria are based on different underground explosion tests Odello and Price Numerical simulation using the proposed method is then implemented to evaluate the safe separation distance for the underground chambers. The charge chamber is 10 m in height and 12.6 m in radius. The charge weight is equivalent to 100-t TNT, which gives a loading density of 20 kg/m  The damaged zones estimated based on the ES criterion and the proposed damage criterion are about 3 times of the charge chamber height in depth, while the damage in the radial direction is much smaller (less than 2 times of the chamber height). Based on the PPV criterion, the damaged zone is about 5 times of the chamber height in depth. These results are comparable with the experimental observations that the cracking zone extends to 4.9 times of the charge radius and the crushing zone extends to 1.9 times of the radius Using the numerical results, attenuation of the The distance is thus derived in terms of  Based on the PPV criterion ( Through the above discussions on the numerical results, it is demonstrated that the numerical method proposed in the context predicts effectively the explosion-induced damage of underground rock chamber. Compared with the numerical results, the empirical methods, which usually ignore the influences of chamber geometry, coupling condition and charge configuration, can result in a very different damage pattern of the charge chamber. The PPV criterion always predicts the largest damaged zone of the chamber while the ES criterion gives the smallest one. The damage criterion proposed in the study is able to categorize the damage intensity quantitatively. The rock damaged areas based on the proposed damage criterion go between those based on the PPV and the ES criteria. Safe separation distance for a certain configuration of underground explosion predicted based on the proposed damage criterion is consistent with the design specification. However, the damage distribution is more clearly identified by the present numerical simulation method. Furthermore, the proposed numerical method is versatile in simulation of more complicated underground explosion configurations. It is worth noting that the present study is based on continuum damage mechanics. The effects of the existing rock faults, joints and fractures are not taken into account in the numerical simulations. The present model employs an axisymmetrical model, which may be extended to three-dimensional cases within the computer capacities. Besides, large-scale explosion test results regarding the rock chamber damage are very rare. To validate the numerical simulations results, a lot of theoretical and experimental efforts of large- scale field tests are needed. A validated numerical model for simulating the rock damage due to underground explosion will be very useful for underground ammunition storage design and protection of underground facilities in the near field. However, for practical application, the rock mass quality and morphology, fault and joint information, etc., may also affect significantly the numerical results. A three-dimensional analysis of the underground chambers, including the protection constructions, is also necessary for engineering problems.