The smooth convex generalized failure function, which represents 1/6 part of envelope in the deviatoric plane, is proposed. The proposed function relies on four shape parameters (L
                     s, a, b and c), in which two parameters (a and b) are dependent on the others. The parameter L
                     s is called extension ratio. The proposed failure function could be incorporated with any two-dimensional (2D) failure criteria to make it a three-dimensional (3D) version. In this paper, a mathematical formulation for incorporation of Hoek-Brown failure criterion with the proposed function is presented. The Hoek-Brown failure criterion is the most suited 2D failure criterion for geomaterials. Two types of analyses for best-fitting solution of published true tri-axial test data were made by considering (1) constant extension ratio and (2) variable extension ratio. The shape and strength parameters for different types of rocks have been determined by best-fitting the published true tri-axial test data for both the analyses. It is observed from the best-fitting solution by considering uniform extension ratio (L
                     s) that shape constants have a correlation with Hoek-Brown strength parameters. Thus, only two parameters (σ
                     c and m) are needed for representing the 3D failure criterion for intact rock. The statistical expression between shape and Hoek-Brown strength parameters is given. In the second analysis, when considering varying extension ratio, another parameter f is introduced. The modified extension ratio is related to f and extension ratio. The results at minimum mean misfit for all the nine rocks indicate that the range of f varies from 0.7 to 1.0. It is found that mean misfit by considering varying extension ratio is lower than that in the first analysis. But it requires three parameters. A statistical expression between f and Hoek-Brown strength parameters has been established. Though coefficient of correlation is not reasonable, we may eliminate it as an extra parameter. At the end of the paper, a methodology has also been given for its application to isotropic jointed rock mass, so that it can be implemented in a numerical code for stability analysis of jointed rock mass structures.Various failure criteria have been proposed so far for rocks ( The influence of intermediate stress on strength is considerable. Therefore, the 3D failure criterion has to be considered for more precise analysis of the structure stability. A number of 3D failure criteria are proposed, but some of them do not fulfill the Drucker’s stability postulate ( Few researchers ( Thus, the authors considered both the possibilities in the analysis, i.e. uniform and varying shape of the failure envelope in the deviatoric plane at different mean stresses. An attempt was made to propose a generalized smooth convex failure envelope in the deviatoric plane. The proposed failure function may incorporate with any 2D failure criteria. The shape of the proposed failure envelope is considered to be uniform in the first analysis and varying with the mean stress in the second analysis. The graphical representation of failure envelope for isotropic rock is six-fold symmetrical about its hydrostatic axis in deviatoric plane ( The deviatoric radius is defined here as the length from hydrostatic axis to any point (say point where The coordinate of center point of the deviatoric plane is ( It is related to Lode angle as follows: To have a similar size in any deviatoric plane, deviatoric radius for a given angle The maximum value of normalized deviatoric radius is one at The extension ratio is defined as a ratio of deviatoric radius at The range of extension ratio is 0.5 to 1.0. The shape of the failure envelope in deviatoric plane is typically triangular at It is observed from The equation of failure envelope in 1/6 part is proposed as it is six-fold symmetrical in nature. It is deduced in where The curve of the above function is an invert parabolic in nature, where (0, 0) is the center of the envelope, with the conditions: By inputting above values of or The tangent at points   The first derivative of the proposed curve is as follows: It is observed from By inputting The proposed function has four basic variables ( The following conditions must also be satisfied to fulfill the condition of convexity at any point within the curve from point The second derivative of The proposed function of failure envelope in deviatoric plane could be clubbed with any 2D failure criterion to convert it into 3D criterion. Hoek-Brown failure criterion is the most suitable for most geomaterials. Therefore, Hoek-Brown failure criterion is adopted. A mathematical formulation for incorporation of Hoek-Brown failure criterion with the proposed function is given in the subsequent sections. The basic form of Hoek-Brown failure criterion is related to the minimum and the maximum principal stresses. It is described as where Strength parameters ( The mean stress in the compressive mode will be as follows: where  Squaring both sides of The solution of the above quadratic equation in terms of minimum principal stress ( If one knows the state of stress condition at failure (point Similarly, the effective minimum principal stress in extension mode ( where the subscript ‘e’ is referred to extension mode (  Squaring both sides of The solution of  As already discussed in or From where At By inputting where The extension ratio, Nine published data sets of true tri-axial tests on different types of intact rocks ( where The values of Hoek-Brown strength parameters for intact rocks ( The best-fitting analysis was performed by considering both possibilities: (1) uniform extension ratio ( The best-fitting solutions in terms of Hoek-Brown strength parameters and shape parameters of the proposed function have been determined for each type of rocks by considering various permutations and combination of strength and shape parameters. The range of It indicates a reasonable correlation between  The results of this analysis have also not been discussed in the paper. It is observed that where The analysis has been made by considering The results have been compared with the failure criterion proposed by The shape for Dunham dolomite, Solenhofen limestone, Mizuho trachyte rocks is almost circular as the parameter The extension ratio varies with mean stress for Hoek-Brown failure criterion. Most of the rocks show that the strength in extension mode is higher compared to that in the compression mode for the same minimum principal stress ( or where When However, in general, it is observed that nonlinear extension ratio gives less mean misfit compared to constant extension ratio. One may consider nonlinear extension ratio rather than constant. But it needs three basis parameters, i.e. The correlation of It is worth noting that both the analyses considering uniform and variable extension ratios were separate. The best-fitting solutions in terms of strength parameters of Hoek-Brown failure criterion and parameters of the proposed function in deviatoric plane on mean misfit have been determined. Therefore, the basic strength parameters for Hoek-Brown failure criterion (i.e. A methodology has been developed to apply the proposed function with Hoek-Brown failure criterion to isotropic jointed rock mass. The reduced Hoek-Brown strength parameter where The Hoek-Brown strength parameter The generalized smooth convex failure function at in deviatoric plane has been proposed. It can incorporate with any 2D failure criterion. A mathematical formulation for incorporating 2D Hoek-Brown failure criterion is presented. Two hypotheses were considered in the analysis. In the first analysis, extension ratio was considered uniform in any deviatoric plane and it was considered to vary with mean stress in the second analysis. The results in terms of mean misfit were compared with the failure criterion proposed by The shape parameter It is concluded from both analyses that one may consider varying extension ratio rather than uniform extension ratio. The proposed function along with Hoek-Brown failure criterion could also be implemented in a numerical code for jointed rock mass analysis as the methodology given in the paper. The first author is thankful to the Department of Science and Technology, India, for financial support through its fast track project scheme (SR/FTP/ETA-17–2007).