The optimal utilization of forages is crucial in cattle production, especially in organic dairy systems that encourage forage-based feeding with limited concentrate amounts. Reduction of the particle size of forages is known to improve feed intake and thus might be a viable option to help cows cope with less nutrient-dense feeds. The main aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of reducing forage particle size with a geometric mean of 52 mm (conventional particle size; CON) to 7 mm (reduced particle size; RED) in a high-forage diet (80% of dry matter) on dairy cows' sorting behavior, feed intake, chewing activity, and performance as well as on total-tract nutrient digestibility. Both diets (CON and RED) consisted of 43% grass hay, 37% clover-grass silage, and 20% concentrate and contained roughly 44% NDF, 15% CP, and 0.5% starch (dry matter basis). For CON, particle size was set by mixing all components for 20 min in a vertical feed mixer. The RED diet was treated the same, but before the mixer was filled, forages were chopped (theoretical length of cut = 0.5 cm) and the hay was hammer-milled (sieve size = 2 cm). Four primiparous and 16 multiparous mid-lactating dairy cows were assigned according to milk yield, body weight (BW), days in milk, and parity into 2 groups and fed 1 of the 2 diets for 34 d. The first 13 d were used for diet adaption, followed by data collection of nutrient intake, chewing activity, sorting behavior, milk production, and nutrient digestibility for the last 21 d of the experiment. Seven days before the start of the experiment, data on BW, dry matter intake (DMI), chewing activity, sorting behavior, and milk production were collected for use as covariates. Results showed that the RED diet improved DMI (+1.8 kg/d) and NDF intake (+0.46 kg/d) but decreased intake of physically effective NDF >8 (−3.25 kg/d). The RED-fed cows increased their intake of smaller particles (<19 mm), whereas CON-fed cows sorted for long particles (>19 mm). The RED cows reduced eating and ruminating time per kilogram of DMI by 4.8 and 1.9 min, respectively, suggesting lower mastication efforts. In addition, the RED diet significantly increased apparent total-tract digestibility of nutrients. As a consequence, RED cows' energy-corrected milk yield was higher (27.0 vs. 29.3 kg/d) without affecting milk solids, cow BW, or feed efficiency. In conclusion, the data support a reduction of forage particle size in high-forage diets as a measure to improve energy intake, performance, and hence forage utilization under these feeding conditions.Forages such as grass silages and hay are sources of physically effective fiber in cattle diets and thus essential for cattle health and welfare. Unlike in the feeding of high-producing dairy cows, where dietary proportions of forages have been largely replaced by energy-dense concentrates, forages such as clover-grass silage and hay can account for up to 100% of daily rations, being the only source of energy and nutrients in grassland-based dairy production systems. The European Common Agricultural Policy encourages such systems, and numerous organic labels support farmers in feeding high-forage diets by paying a higher price for milk. In addition, from a food security point of view, forage-based livestock production improves the net human food supply ( However, a high inclusion rate of forages in dairy cattle diets is known to limit their DM and nutrient intake, with consequences for metabolic health and performance. Diets with a high fiber content and low nutrient and energy density, such as forage-based diets, require a substantially higher DMI to compensate for the lack of concentrates and fulfill the animals' high energy requirements. It has long been known that the bulkiness of feeds may cause an earlier termination of a meal due to the restricted distension capacity of the reticulo-rumen and hence restrict voluntary feed intake ( The experiment was approved by the Institutional Ethics and Animal Welfare Committee of the University of Veterinary Medicine (Vetmeduni Vienna) in accordance with Good Scientific Practice guidelines and national legislation (protocol no. ETK-07/10/2017). The trial was carried out at the organic dairy farm of the Secondary School for Agriculture and Forestry HBLA Ursprung (Elixhausen, Austria; 570 m above sea level, 1,250 mm annual precipitation, 8.5°C average annual temperature) near the city of Salzburg, Austria, from the beginning of January 2018 until the beginning of March 2018. Cows were kept in a loose-housing system with cubicles in accordance with the European regulations on organic farming ( We used 4 primiparous and 16 multiparous (second to ninth lactation) Holstein Friesian cows that were each assigned to 1 of the 2 treatment groups: 1 control group (forage particle size with a geometric mean of 52 mm; conventional particle size, Forages used in this experiment were clover-grass silage and hay. For production of the clover-grass silage, wilted forage with an average DM content of 40% was cut (theoretical length of cut = 4 cm) by a silage loading wagon (Europrofi Combiline, Pöttinger Landtechnik, Grieskirchen, Austria) and inoculated with Bon Silage Plus (Wilhelm Schaumann GmbH, An der Mühlenau, Germany) at a rate of 1 × 10 The TMR for the CON group had a conventional forage particle size with a geometric mean ( Data were collected daily during the covariate period and, after 13 d of adaptation to the diet, during the last 21 d of the experimental period, unless stated otherwise. Dry matter intake was determined as the difference between the manually provided TMR and collected refusals. The DM content of the TMR and the refusals was determined daily using a forced-air oven at 105°C for 24 h. Particle size distribution of TMR on a DM basis ( Feed selection of cows was determined once on 2 consecutive days and 2 times on 4 consecutive days during the covariate and the experimental period, respectively. To do so, particle size distribution was measured in refusals collected from the bunk before new feed was offered. Feed selection of each cow was expressed through the change in particle size distribution (as-fed basis) of the provided TMR in relation to the refusals. According to For chemical composition, samples of the provided TMR and the corresponding refusals were pooled for each group over 2 consecutive days, once during the covariate period and 6 times during the experimental period. Samples were immediately vacuum-packed and frozen at −20°C until analysis in a commercial laboratory. Standard operating procedures of the laboratory were in accordance with Chewing activity was measured using 10 RumiWatch noseband sensors (RumiWatch System, ITIN + HOCH GmbH, Liestal, Switzerland). Five cows in each group wore these nosebands simultaneously for a set period of time, after which halters were switched to the remaining cows. Wearing periods were set from d 1 to 3 and d 6 to 8 in the covariate feeding period and from d 1 to 7 and d 11 to 16 in the experimental feeding period. The RumiWatch noseband sensor consists of a halter, a battery, an oil-filled tube, an accelerometer, and a data storage device. The change of pressure within the tube and the movement of the accelerometer are recorded at a frequency of 10 Hz to reflect the chewing activity of the cow ( Milk yield was registered automatically during milking (0600 and 1630 h) in a 2 × 3 herringbone milking parlor. Milk samples from 2 consecutive milkings were taken, providing 2 and 4 observations per cow from the covariate and experimental periods, respectively. Samples were immediately conserved with Bronysolv (ANA.LI.TIK, Wien, Austria) and analyzed for fat, protein, lactose, and urea in a commercial laboratory using a Milkoscan (Foss Electric, Hillerød, Denmark). During both the covariate and experimental periods, cows were weighed immediately after 4 consecutive milkings over a period of 2 d on a weekly basis, resulting in 1 and 6 observations per cow from the covariate and experimental periods, respectively. Backfat thickness ( Apparent total-tract digestibility ( Data collected on a daily basis during the experimental period were analyzed using PROC MIXED of SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Data were checked for normal distribution and the presence of outliers. Data from the covariate period were averaged on a weekly basis. The statistical model included treatment (CON, RED), parity group (1–3, >3), and day of the experiment as fixed effects, the corresponding value of the dependent variable from the covariate period as covariate, and cow nested within treatment as a random effect. Additionally, the measurements taken on the same animal but at different times (e.g., BW and milk yield) were considered as repeated measures in the model. Time dependency of data was modeled through an autoregressive covariance structure. Data for BFT, BW change, and ATTD were also analyzed with PROC MIXED, but day of the experiment was excluded and compound symmetry was used as a covariance structure in the model. The level of significance was considered to be Data showed that both diets (CON and RED) had similar chemical composition ( Rechopping forages before feeding led to an obvious change in feed sorting behavior ( Although Furthermore, total eating time was reduced ( Conversely, as eating time was reduced in the RED feeding group, ruminating time was slightly extended by 24.6 min/d or 4.6% ( The RED treatment increased DMI by 1.8 kg/d ( Feeding cows a diet with RFPS enhanced the ATTD of all nutrients ( This study was designed to evaluate whether a reduction in the conventional particle size typically fed on grassland-based farms in Alpine regions to a theoretical length of cut of ≤0.5 cm would affect forage utilization on organic dairy farms. Indeed, we found a significant improvement in forage utilization by reducing the particle size of clover-grass silage and hay fed to dairy cows. More specifically, we observed that feeding the RED diet improved DMI and nutrient digestibility, tended to prolong rumination time, and had a positive, if unexpected, influence on cows' feed sorting behavior. In light of the importance of high DMI when feeding high-forage diets, the intake of the CON group was high according to results observed under similar feeding conditions ( The higher feed intake in RED cows can also be attributed to the lower total chewing time. The increased feed intake of RED-fed cows was also caused by a higher digestibility of fiber ( Feed sorting behavior of cows was less pronounced when feeding a TMR containing chopped forages. This is in agreement with previous studies ( The CON-fed cows ingested a higher amount of long particles and even preferred this fraction (i.e., selection index >100), which contradicts findings in studies using concentrate-based diets ( On the other hand, RED cows sorted for smaller particles (<19 mm), suggesting a greater intake of this fraction compared with CON cows. Due to chopping, the RED diet contained higher proportions of hay and silage in the medium and short fraction than the CON diet, whereby the fine particle pool of the RED diet was enriched solely by hammer-milled hay. It is possible that forages of good quality were more attractive for cows than the concentrate because of the inclusion of less palatable field beans in the latter. Particularly, As expected, the animals' chewing activity was reduced by feeding the RED diet; however, the absolute level still ranged around the maximum reported by Due to the elevated DMI, an increase in milk production by approximately 3.6 kg/d could be expected ( It is also possible that a higher increase of milk production in RED cows was limited by the available N supply for rumen microbiota ( Reducing the particle size of good-quality forages included in a high-forage TMR improved dairy cows' energy supply, suggesting a better forage utilization. Feed intake was improved by the decreased mastication efforts required and probably by a better use of rumen capacity. Although lower times spent chewing each kilogram of ingested feed suggest a lower mechanical particle breakdown, the greater initial contact area might have improved microbial colonization and thus ATTD of nutrients. A reduction in selective feed consumption might have also made a more balanced nutrient spectrum available to microorganisms. Milk production was affected by the improved energy supply, and the relatively long observation period may have contributed to this effect. Because diets were low in starch, the higher total fiber intake per se was more important to induce rumination than the intake of physically effective fiber. To introduce these findings into practice, it would be necessary to optimize the forage chopping procedure as well as test diets with other forage particle sizes. The authors are grateful to the Austrian Federal Ministry for Sustainability and Tourism, the Provincial Government of Salzburg (Austria), Raiffeisenverband Salzburg, and the “Ja! Natürlich!” brand of the REWE group (Wiener Neudorf, Austria) for funding this experiment. In addition, we are grateful to the secondary school for agriculture and forestry HBLA Ursprung (Elixhausen, Austria) for housing the experiment; to the farm staff, especially Franz Griessner, for helping with the experimental work; and to Gruber Maschinen GmbH (Gaspoltshofen, Austria) and the Karl J. Mayer company (Krenglbach, Austria) for technical advice on chopping feed. We also thank Anita Dockner (Institute of Animal Nutrition and Functional Plant Compounds at the University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Austria) for performing chemical analyses and Kathleen Knaus (University of Vienna, Austria) for editing assistance. 