In this study, effects of thyme/cumin essential oils (EO) and butylated hydroxyl anisole (BHA)/butylated hydroxyl toluene (BHT) on physicochemical properties and storage stability of chicken patties were compared in different storage periods (0, 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 d). It was found that there were significant (P < 0.05) differences between physicochemical properties of patty samples treated with EO and the synthetic antioxidants. The EO showed similar performance to those of BHA and BHT in limiting TBARS values of chicken patty samples. Similarity in performance was also the case for microbial stability (total aerobic mesophilic, psychrotrophic, lactic acid, and coliform bacteria as well as molds and yeasts); namely, their effects were significant (P < 0.05). Effect of thyme EO was significant (P < 0.05) and remarkable, not allowing any coliform bacteria to grow in the samples. Given that EO were obtained from natural sources, the data suggested that the EO might be more useful than their synthetic counterparts, BHA and BHT, as additives for chicken patties to maintain oxidative/microbial stability and increase shelf life.Chicken meat is a very popular food commodity worldwide, and its consumption has increased over the last decades in many countries. Chicken meat has many desirable nutritional characteristics such as low lipid content and relatively high concentration of polyunsaturated fatty acids, which can be further increased by specific dietary strategies ( Natural antioxidants of plant origin have been introduced to improve lipid stability as well as enhance sensory properties of food. Antioxidant properties of such plant origin materials are mainly attributed to their phenolic contents; thus, their antioxidant action is similar to synthetic phenolic antioxidants ( The aim of the present study was to determine and compare effectiveness of the synthetic antioxidants (BHA/BHT) and EO of thyme and cumin on the physicochemical properties and oxidative/microbial stability of chicken patties as well as to reveal potential use of such natural plant materials in poultry products. The day after slaughter, boneless meat from 37-d-old chickens on polyfoam plates overwrapped with polyvinyl chloride stretch film were obtained from a poultry processor (Beypi Co., Bolu, Turkey). In the production of patties, the chicken meats including breast (68%), thigh (21%), and skin (11%) were used. The fresh chicken meat (moisture, protein, and fat contents, and pH value of 70.24%, 21.01%, and 5.32%, and 6.28, respectively) was transported to the laboratory under refrigerated conditions. All chemicals and reagents used for the study were of analytical grade. Butylated hydroxyanisole and BHT were procured from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO). Dried thyme ( Essential oils of thyme ( After meat was immediately transferred to the laboratory under cold chain conditions, it was ground through a 3-mm plate grinder (Tefal, Le Hachoir 1500 W, Guangdong, China). Each batch of patties was prepared to include 88.5% chicken meat, 10% rusk flour, and 1.5% salt. The EO of the selected spices were added into related meat batter batches at levels of 200 and 500 µL/kg, whereas the BHA and BHT were separately added at levels of 100 and 200 mg/kg. The BHA and BHT were dissolved in 5 mL of sunflower oil before addition, and the same quantity of oil was added to other meat batter batches to maintain uniformity. Then, batter batches were kneaded and homogeneously blended in a laboratory type mixer (Kitchen Aid Food Grinder Mixer Attachment Model FGA, St. Joseph, MI) to achieve homogeneity. The batter batches were shaped into patties with 40.0 mm diameter and 11 mm thickness so that each weighed between 25 and 30 g. Experimental raw patty samples were placed on polystyrene trays. Each batch of patties was vacuum packaged by using a vacuum sealer (Original Henkelman Vacuum Systems Boxer 42, Hertogenbosch, Holland) in a polystyrene tray and wrapped with a high barrier film (water vapor permeability of 8.5 g/m For pH determination, sample (10 g) was homogenized in 100 mL of distilled water for 1 min using a blender (Waring Commercial Blender, New Hartford, CT). Then, pH was measured using a pH meter (pH 315i/SET WTW, Weilheim, Germany; Color measurements were performed on chicken patty samples at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C) using a Chromameter CR-400 (Konica Minolta Inc., Osaka, Japan) with illuminate D65, 2° observer, diffuse/O mode, 8 mm aperture for illumination and 8 mm for measurement. The chromameter was standardized with a white ceramic tile [L* (lightness) = 98.11, a* (redness) = −0.53, and b* (yellowness) = 2.21] before measurements. The L*, a*, and b* color coordinates were determined according to the Commission Internationale d'Eclairage L*a*b* color space system. Visual impression of color is formed from hue-angle [ Thiobarbituric acid reactive substance ( For determination of microbial stability of the chicken patty samples, chicken meat used in patty preparation was aseptically obtained from a commercial company (Beypi Co., Bolu, Turkey). The meat was immediately transferred to the laboratory under cold chain conditions and ground through the grinder (Tefal, Le Hachoir 1500 W, Guangdong, China). To obtain patty samples, the ground meat was allocated into 8 groups (4 for thyme/cumin EO and 4 for BHA/BHT), and each of them was separately and aseptically added with the previously described EO and synthetic antioxidants at different concentrations. To be able to determine exact antimicrobial effect of the essential oils and synthetic antioxidants, no ingredient that might have any antimicrobial activity was added into the patty formulation. Each group was mixed, kneaded, and shaped into patties as described above. The raw patty samples were placed into sterilized stomacher bags (Masticator NR 1147, Spain) and stored in a refrigerator (4 ± 1°C) for 1 h until analysis conducted on 0, 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 d of storage. For microbiological analysis, a composite sample (10 g) was formed with portions of at least 3 patties and then homogenized with 90 mL of sterile 1.5% peptone water in a Stomacher 400 (Mayo Homogenius HG 400V Stomacher, Via Rosmini, Baranzate, Italy) for 1 min. Aliquots were serially diluted up to 10 Except for color measurements (n = 12), each parameter was tested in triplicate samples with 2 replications (n = 6). Conventional statistical methods were used to calculate means and standard deviations. Collected data were subjected to statistical analysis using MINITAB for Windows Release 14 (2003, Minitab Inc., State College, PA). Analysis of variance was used to evaluate effect of treatments and storage period (0, 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 d) on the physicochemical properties and storage stability (shelf life) parameters. After microbiological data were transferred into logarithms of the number of cfu per gram, they were subjected to statistical analysis. When a significant (  Mean moisture, protein, and fat contents, and pH value of chicken meat used in this research were determined to be 70.24%, 21.01%, 5.32%, and 6.28, respectively. Similar results were reported ( Given that consumer rejection occurred at 40% MetMb in meat products ( As far as the color properties were concerned, the patty samples treated with EO (except for thyme EO at 0.05%) had lower L* values (brightness) than did those treated with BHA and BHT ( On the other hand, it should be noted that the cumin EO treatment at 0.02% resulted in the highest a* values. The reason could be related to the fact that this treatment also resulted in the highest pH value ( As for the effect of storage time on color properties, L* values were observed to increase ( On the other hand, an inverse trend was observed in the a* values during storage period. Probably, this decrease in redness was associated with effect of pH on the percent myoglobin ( The effects of treatment and storage time on oxidative and microbial stability are shown in  The performance of each treatment to stabilize shelf life parameters might be different during the storage period (0, 3, 7, 14, 21, and 28 d). Therefore, the way to evaluate effect of each treatment during the storage period was to calculate slope of the line of curve plotted for each stability parameter versus storage time. Our results indicated that, like synthetic antioxidants (namely, BHA and BHT), EO of the thyme and cumin spices studied could limit oxidation, extending storage time of chicken patties. Regarding microbial stability, the EO exhibited very good performance, keeping microbial count stable, even not allowing any coliform bacteria to grow in the chicken patties. Given that the EO were obtained from natural sources, it can be suggested that they are more useful than their synthetic counterparts, BHA and BHT, as additives for chicken patties to maintain stability and increase shelf life. This study was supported by The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK-TOVAG, Project Number: 108 O 002). This study was a part of project named, “The effect of essential oils of some spices on the storage stability and microbiological quality of vacuum-packaged chicken patties.” The authors thank Gülsah Kanbur (Selçuk University, Konya, Turkey) for her valuable support.