Monensin (tradename: Rumensin) should reduce the extent of amino acid deamination in the rumen, and supplemental fat should decrease protozoal abundance and intraruminal N recycling. Because animal-vegetable (AV) fat can be biohydrogenated in the rumen and decrease its effectiveness as an anti-protozoal agent, we included diets supplemented with coconut oil (CNO) to inhibit protozoa. In a 6 × 6 Latin square design with a 2 × 3 factorial arrangement of treatments, 6 rumen-cannulated cows were fed diets without or with Rumensin (12g/909kg) and either no fat (control), 5% AV fat, or 5% CNO. The log10 concentrations (cells/mL) of total protozoa were not different between control (5.97) and AV fat (5.95) but were decreased by CNO (4.79; main effect of fat source). Entodinium and Dasytricha decreased as a proportion of total cells from feeding CNO, whereas Epidinium was unchanged in total abundance and thus increased proportionately. Total volatile fatty acid concentration was not affected by diet, but the acetate:propionate ratio decreased for CNO (1.85) versus control (2.95) or AV fat (2.58). Feeding CNO (23.8%) decreased ruminal neutral detergent fiber digestibility compared with control (31.1%) and AV fat (30.5%). The total-tract digestibility of NDF was lower for CNO (45.8%) versus control (57.0%) and AV fat (54.6%), with no difference in apparent organic matter digestibility (averaging 69.8%). The omasal flows of microbial N and non-ammonia N were lower for CNO versus control and AV fat, but efficiency of microbial protein synthesis was not affected. The dry matter intake was 4.5kg/d lower with CNO, which decreased milk production by 3.1kg/d. Main effect means of dry matter intake and milk yield tended to decrease by 0.7 and 1.2kg/d, respectively, when Rumensin was added. Both percentage and production of milk fat decreased for CNO (main effect of fat source). An interaction was observed such that AV decreased milk fat yield more when combined with Rumensin. Using large amounts of supplemental fat, especially CNO, to decrease abundance of protozoa requires further research to characterize benefits versus risks, especiallywhen combined with Rumensin.Microbial protein is the major source of metabolizable protein for dairy cows ( Supplemental dietary lipids have been researched to decrease protozoal abundance in the rumen ( Medium-chain FA ( We reasoned that differences in palatability and meal feeding pattern for cows fed fat can promote variability in supplemental fat bioactivity among trials. Commercialized under the tradename Rumensin ( Six primiparous Holstein cows were fitted with rumen cannulas and used per the approved guidelines of The Ohio State University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. At the start of the experiment, cows were 48, 64, 87, 88, 94, and 95 DIM. All 6 cows received each of the 6 diets in 6 periods in a 6 The dietary treatments were arranged in a 2 × 3 factorial without or with R and either no supplemental fat, 5.0% AV fat, or 5.0% CNO. All 6 diets were formulated to have 42% NFC, 16.8% CP, and 49% forage, which consisted of alfalfa hay:corn silage (33:67 DM basis) to provide 21.5% forage NDF ( Cows were housed in a conventional tie-stall barn with mattresses. They were fed one-twelfth of their daily feed allowance every 2 Cows were milked at 0500 and 1700 Feed offered and individual dietary components were sampled on d 13 through 15, and orts were sampled on d 14 through 16 of the collection period and stored at −20°C. A composite of each sample was dried at 60°C and ground in a Wiley mill (Arthur H. Thomas Co., Philadelphia, PA) through a 2-mm screen before nutrient analyses. The feed offered, orts, and individual components were analyzed for DM, OM, and Kjeldahl N concentration ( The feed, orts, and digesta were analyzed for NDF using a fiber analyzer (ANKOM A200, ANKOM Technology). Half-gram samples were thermally sealed in filter bags, presoaked in acetone, and refluxed for 75 The complete evacuation of ruminal contents was performed on d 20 at 0800 The liquid fraction from the evacuation subsamples was partitioned into aliquots for determination of protozoal counts, VFA, NH The solid fraction from the evacuation was split into 2 subsamples; the first one was used for DM and dried at 55°C in a forced-air oven, and the second was used for solid-associated bacteria ( Because Yb tends to preferentially bind to small particles with high surface area, we intended to remove small particles before the marking process. Corn silage was dried at 55°C in a forced-air oven and separated on the Pennsylvania State Particle Size Separator. Particles larger than 8 Cobalt-EDTA was prepared as described previously by Although omasal flow values presented later are based on whole digesta (see later discussion), our original intention was to use the double-marker method to reconstitute liquid and solids fractions for measurement of omasal flow. Using the method of omasal sampling described by Passage rates from the rumen were measured on d 18 and 19. The Yb-marked corn silage, Co-EDTA and Solid ruminal samples, whole omasal digesta samples, and Yb-labeled corn silage doses were analyzed for Yb at the Virginia Tech Soil Testing Laboratory (Blacksburg, VA) with a Thermo Elemental Inductively Coupled Argon Plasma Atomic Emission Simultaneous Spectrometer (ICAP 61E; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) using Thermo's ICP Manager 61 software equipped with a TJA-300 autosampler at a 328.937-nm wavelength. A 2-g sample was weighed, ashed at 450°C for 48 Digestibility was measured on d 14 to 16 of each period. A pellet containing 10% chromic oxide and 90% soybean hulls was dosed through the rumen cannula 3 times per day on d 9 through 16 for a combined daily total of 1% of DMI. Fecal grab samples were taken on d 8 for background and d 14 to 16 of each period to represent every 4 Ruminal protozoal counts, VFA concentration and pool size, nutrient digestibilities, and milk production and composition data were analyzed as a 6 × 6 Latin square for a 2 × 3 factorial arrangement of treatments using PROC MIXED of SAS (v9.1; SAS Institute Inc.) according to the following model: The analyzed composition of the diets is shown in There was no effect of R on protozoal abundance ( No effects of treatment on ruminal pH were observed ( Averaged over control or fat treatments, ruminal mass (total of liquid The intake of OM tended ( Averaged over fat treatments, cows fed diets without R tended ( The trend ( Supplementing dietary fat sources decreased milk fat percentage, and CNO depressed fat by a further 0.47% units compared with AV fat (fat source effect). Milk fat production was decreased by feeding both fats. Although the main effect of fat source resulted from a further decrease in milk fat production from CNO than AV fat, the trend ( Rumensin had minor effects on protozoa, probably because of our transfaunation between periods ( The main effect of fat addition was mainly due to a result of the effect of CNO versus AV fat. When individual MCFA were evaluated to control protozoal abundance, lauric acid was confirmed as the causative agent in CNO ( To our knowledge, a mechanism of inhibition by FA has not been established for protozoa. Apparently, the FA need to have a free carboxyl group before being toxic ( The major benefit of feeding R is usually attributed to inhibition of gram-positive bacteria and a shift of fermentation from acetate to propionate production ( We report here a significant shift of fermentation from acetate, butyrate, and isovalerate toward propionate and valerate with the addition of fat, especially with CNO compared with AV fat. Because propionate and valerate are important hydrogen sinks, we would expect a resultant decrease in methane production per unit of DMI. We measured a decrease in ruminal mass of total contents and DM when R was fed, but no changes in passage rates occurred ( The ruminal mass and ruminal liquid pool sizes were lower for supplementation of AV fat compared with CNO, even though DMI was depressed much more for CNO. According to We recognize the likelihood that omasal sampling can bias for fluid and against large particles, as documented by previous authors ( We were concerned that the typical 3-marker approach ( Our intention was to mark corn silage (the predominant forage) particles that were retained on a 1.18-mm screen using a Yb application, soaking, and rinsing to remove most of the Yb bound to low-affinity sites ( Although we planned to use a double-marker approach and do not advocate the use of a single marker for omasal flow studies, the flow values and digestibilities were highly variable in the current study; NDF digestibilities occasionally were either negative or exceeded 100%. In contrast with our previous experience ( Relatively little direct evidence supports or refutes the necessary assumption that omasal sampling with our Yb marking approach does or does not bias among-treatment comparisons. Most forage particles undergo comminution to a size ( Ruminal and total-tract apparent digestibilities of OM were not different with diet ( The omasal flow of N components was decreased by CNO supplementation, mostly because of the decreased N intake ( We noted a drastic decrease in DMI when CNO was supplemented ( We observed a severe decrease in milk production, milk fat percentage, and milk fat yield with CNO added to the diet. The interactions ( The addition of CNO in the diet greatly suppressed protozoal abundance. The fermentation shifted toward the hydrogen sinks, propionate and valerate. The changes in VFA were associated with a trend for decreased ruminal digestibility. Significantly decreased total-tract digestibility of NDF and DMI for CNO suppressed milk production. Although consistent with expectations for decreased protozoal abundance, CNO did not improve EMPS. Dry matter intake and milk production was also decreased with R. With our high inclusion rates of supplemental fat, milk fat depression was prevalent with CNO and also with AV fat more when supplemented with R than without R, even though diets were fed every 2