The microbiological and chemical characteristics as well as organic and amino acid profiles of kefir samples made from cow and buffalo milks fermented by kefir grains and starter culture were investigated during storage for 21d at 4°C. After incubation, lactic, acetic, and citric acid concentrations showed a difference among the samples due to milk type and production methods. Storage time had little effect on the organic acid values of kefir samples. As compared with cow milk kefir, buffalo milk kefir had higher numbers of microorganisms, except lactobacilli, at the end of storage. Whereas pH and titratable acidity exhibited similar changes during storage in all kefir samples, ethanol levels were significantly increased in buffalo milk kefir samples. Glutamic acid was the major amino acid at all sampling times for all samples. Tyrosine, serine, histidine, alanine, methionine, and lysine concentrations were determined to be different in all samples depending on milk type. In general, due to the higher microbial population (especially yeast), kefir made from buffalo milk may be preferred.Kefir is a fermented dairy product originating from the Caucasus Mountains ( Kefir is generally consumed with meals and alone as a probiotic drink. It is recommended for consumption because of its probiotic bacteria and yeast mixture ( The kefir-producing process is divided 2 categories: traditional and industrial methods ( Kefir is made from different milks, such as bovine, goat, and ovine ( Buffalo milk differs from other milks not only in terms of its taste, but also in chemical composition ( The raw cow (2.6 Raw buffalo and cow milks were pasteurized at 90°C for 15 The procedure for making kefir with kefir starter culture involves different steps. Freeze-dried kefir starter culture was added to raw milks at a level of 0.025 All kefir products were stored for 21 Kefir samples (10 The titratable acidity of kefir samples was determined using the AOAC titration method using 0.1 The ethanol content in kefir samples was determined following the method of Organic acids were determined by HPLC according to A modification of the methods of The production and storage of kefir samples made from cow and buffalo milks fermented by kefir grains and starter culture were performed in triplicate and all analyses were performed in duplicate. An ANOVA was performed by the General Linear Models using SPSS 17.0 package program (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL), and Tukey test was used to find significant differences ( Kefir samples were analyzed for their microbiological properties at d 1 (after the incubation), 7, 14, and 21 of storage at 4°C. The counts of lactobacilli, lactococci, Although lactobacilli counts of the kefir samples produced from cow milk were found higher than buffalo milk kefir samples on d 1 ( Lactococci counts (7.75 log cfu/mL) of KS-B were determined to be ~1 log cfu/mL higher than those of other kefir samples at the end of incubation (  The pH values of KG-C, KG-B, KS-C, and KS-B were found to be 4.55, 4.26, 4.62 and 4.64, respectively, on d 1 ( Ethanol is responsible for the exotic, refreshing flavor and distinctive aroma of kefir, thus it is one of the most important quality factors in kefir. Ethanol contents of the kefir samples showed significant differences due to production methods. Production with kefir grains provided higher ( The mean lactic acid levels of KG-C, KS-C, KG-B, and KS-B at d 1 were 7,905.96, 8,618.73, 6,826.81, and 7,692.66 µg/g, respectively ( The AA concentrations of the kefir samples made from cow and buffalo milk using kefir grain and starter culture are presented in Generally, the AA concentrations of the kefir samples may have resulted from the combination of proteolytic activity, assimilation of peptides, and release of AA from the cells during incubation and storage. During storage, the change in glutamic acid may have been due to decarboxylation to g-aminobutyric acid ( In our study, kefir samples manufactured from cow and buffalo milk using kefir grains and starter culture had similar chemical properties except for ethanol. The type of milk used in kefir production affected microbiological characteristics, AA, and organic acid concentrations of the kefir samples. Changed of these properties in kefir samples were different depending on the types of culture during storage. The rapid yeast growth in buffalo milk kefir is very important due to the ethanol production in kefir. The highest ethanol content and yeast growth was detected in KG-B at the end of storage. Some probiotic yeast strains in kefir exhibited a beneficial effect on health, and ethanol provides the exotic, refreshing flavor and distinctive aroma of kefir. Thus, kefir production from buffalo milk using kefir grain may be preferred because of the flavor and aroma formed by yeast.