We studied the changes in morphological, geometric, densitometric, and mechanical parameters of the femur and tibia during 56 D of rearing chickens with different growth rates. Ten femur and tibia were collected from fast-growing chickens (FG) and 2 types of medium-growing chickens (MGH and MGGP) immediately after hatching (0 D) and on 7, 14, 21, 35, 42, 49, and 56 D of life. The bone parameters of chickens across all genetic groups were found to be similar on 0 D, with exceptions of lower percentage contribution of bone weight (BW) in FG chickens (P < 0.05), lower total bone volume in MGGP chickens (P < 0.05), and lower maximum elastic strength in MGH chickens (P < 0.05). The bones developed in FG chickens were longer and wider; however, an increase in bone mineral density (BMD) between 42 and 49 D was not observed. The BMD value in FG chickens on 56 D was comparable to that in MGH chickens (P = 0.089) and significantly lower than that in MGGP chickens (P = 0.021). Mean relative wall thickness, despite longer and thicker bones in FG chickens, was comparable and often lower than that of MGH and MGGP chickens. In conclusion, the results showed that medium-growing chickens could be reared for up to 56 D without the risk of any growth impairment due to problems associated with deterioration of pelvic limb bone quality.Growth rate of chickens is the basic criterion considered in breeding flocks when selecting for meat yield traits. This is due to the huge economic importance and ease of controlling the growth rate. Growth is a dynamic process that leads to an increase in total bone weight ( Impaired bone development limits the growth of poultry, thereby contributing to increased mortality and losses due to poor classification of carcasses in slaughterhouses, thus concurrently becoming 1 of the 4 main causes that reduces the economics of production (Manning et al., Therefore, the aim of this study is to analyze the bone characteristics of meat-type chickens with different growth rates during their growth and development. All procedures were performed according to the guidelines for the care and use of research animals and were approved by the Third Local Ethics Committee on Animal Experimentation in Warsaw (SGGW Warsaw) (resolution number 29/2010, Warsaw, PL). In this study, fast-growing Cobb 500 (FG) chickens and 2 medium-growing chickens MGH (HubbardJA957) and MGGP (only males) were raised up to 56 D of age. MGGP chickens consisted of the second generation of the experimental line created from crossing Polish native Greenleg Partridge hens and commercial parental line heavy type rooster (Cobb 500). A total of 1,080 chickens were reared, 360 of each genotype. Ten replications consisting of 36 chickens kept in the same pen, with an area of 3 m The BW of individual chickens was determined (±1.0 g) at the time of insertion (0 D) and on 7, 14, 21, 35, 49, and 56 D of life. In each of these growth stages, 10 chickens from each genotype were randomly selected for slaughter. The chickens were slaughtered by decapitation after electrical stunning. After bleeding, femur and tibia bones were collected from the right leg of each chicken. After removal of all soft tissue residues, bone mass (±0.1 g), percentage contribution of femur weight to BW ( All bones were scanned using the dual energy X-ray absorptiometry ( Volumetric bone mineral density (g/cm Geometrical properties of the femur and tibia were determined on the basis of measurements of horizontal and vertical diameters (both external and internal) of the mid-diaphyseal cross-section of the bone obtained from computed tomography multiplanar reconstructions. The values of cross-sectional area ( Mechanical properties of the femur and tibia were determined using a 3-point bending test and an Instron 3367 apparatus (Instron, Canton, MA) integrated with a computer. The relationship between loading force of the evaluated bone and the resulting displacement was recorded. The values of maximum elastic strength (Wy) and ultimate strength (Wf) were determined. The distance between bone supports was set at 40% of the total bone length, and the measuring head loaded bone samples at the midshaft with a constant speed of 50 mm/min (Krupski et al., During the weekly control of BW, the arithmetic mean for all the genetic groups of chickens was calculated. The obtained data were checked for normality, and birds whose BW deviated from the group were eliminated. The chickens for slaughter were randomly selected from the remaining ones. In this study, the mean values of BW were presented only for birds from which bones were collected, i.e., for 10 chickens of each genotype and each of the analyzed developmental stages. Average BW for all chickens was presented and analyzed previously (Michalczuk et al.,  All calculations were performed using Statistica 10.0 software (Statistica, Results of morphological parameters of chicken bones are presented in Table Percentage contribution of femur weight to BW in FG chickens ranged from 0.38% on 0 D to 0.50% on 56 D of life, and in the case of PCT from 0.53 to 0.71%. For MGH chickens, PCF ranged from 0.39% on 0 D to 0.58% on 56 D, while PCT ranged from 0.58 to 0.83% and was the highest for both bones of all groups of chickens (Tables The length and width of the femur and tibia gradually increased each week. The chicken genotype had no effect on the length of both bones on 0 D. From 7 to 21 D and on 49 D, the highest length of the femur was observed in FG chickens, followed by the MGH group and the lowest for the MGGP group. On 35 and 56 D, femur lengths reached similar values for all chickens (Table A significant increase in CBA of the femur and tibia in FG chickens was observed without exception up to 35 D, while it remained at a constant level from 35 to 49 D and increased in the last week (Tables Total bone volume of both bones of all chicken groups increased systematically. For both femur and tibia, the highest Bvol on 0, 21, 35, 42, and 49 D was found for FG chickens. In addition, the Bvol of the femur in FG chickens was also higher than that in MGGP and MGH chickens on 56 D (Table The results of geometric parameters of chicken bones are presented in Tables Cross-sectional area in the femur increased with the age of chickens. With the exception of 21 D for MGH chickens and 56 D for FG and MGH chickens, the value of A in the tibia increased significantly initially between 7 and 14 D, and subsequently, there was no increase on 21 D for FG and MGGP chickens. The next significant increase in this parameter for FG and MGGP chickens occurred only on 35 and 56 D. On 7 D, the A of the femur in MGH chickens was significantly higher than that in FG and MGGP chickens ( The second moment of inertia remained unchanged for all groups of chickens up to 21 D for femur. Similarly, no significant changes in Ix were found to 21 D in tibia for FG and MGGP chickens, whereas Ix tibia of MGH chickens increased significantly by 19.82 mm Mean relative wall thickness of the femur increased between 7 and 14 D for all groups of chickens, while CI values of the femur increased in the same period only for FG and MGH chickens. A significant decrease in MWRT and CI values of the femur was observed on 21 and 35 D when compared with that on 7 and 14 D for all groups of chickens. From 42 to 56 D, the MRWT values of the femur did not change, while femur CI values decreased further, with a decrease in the CI of MGH chickens on 42 and 49 D, and for FG and MGGP chickens in 56 D. For the tibia, contrary to the femur, no increase in MRWT and CI was observed (Table The results of evaluation of densitometric parameters are presented in Tables An increase in femoral Td was found on 14 D for FG and MGH chickens, on 21 D for MGH and MGGP chickens, and on 49 D for chickens from all genetic groups (Table Throughout the experiment, Td of the femur was comparable in all groups of chickens, with an exception of higher value in FG chickens on 35 D (Table BMD of the femur and tibia increased gradually only in FG chickens. A significant increase in BMD in MGH chickens was reported only on 21 D for the femur and on 21 and 35 D for the tibia, while BMD of both these bones in MGGP chickens increased significantly only on 56 D (Table A significant increase in Cd of the femur across all groups of chickens was observed on 14 and 21 D. At the later time points, Cd of femur in FG chickens remained unchanged, while on 35 D, an increase in this parameter in MGH chickens ( The results of mechanical evaluation of bones are presented in Figure The aim of this study was to compare the development of the femur and tibia in chickens with different growth potential. The first important result noted was the differences in chicken bone parameters on 0 D. FG chickens were characterized by the highest Bvol values and MGH chickens by very low maximum elastic strength values for the femur. There is not enough information in the literature on the detailed parameters of broiler bones on 0 D, but based on the obtained results and comparison of the groups, it can be concluded that the bones from FG chickens were the most developed at that time, particularly in comparison with MGGP chicken bones. Above all, femur of FG chickens on 0 D was heaviest and longest, whereas tibia was characterized by highest PCT in comparison with bones of the remaining chicken groups. Moreover, FG chicken bones on 0 D were characterized by relatively high values of mechanical parameters. Although BMD and BMC of bones were not determined on 0 D, the values of MvBMD in this period indicated that physiological bone mineralization process in FG chickens was correct, and MvBMD values of the tibia in these chickens were even higher than that in MGGP chickens. High BMD and BMC values in FG chickens were also observed on 7 D. First, the bones in FG chickens had significantly higher BMC values, which is a measure of the mineral part of bone structure, than those of the bones of the other chicken groups. These results indicate that intensive selection aimed at accelerating the growth rate and increasing meat yield did not result in negative changes in bone development and mineralization during embryogenesis. It has been confirmed many times before that the cause of bone developmental disorders in broilers is due to the unnatural fast growth rate, especially of the breast and leg muscles. Because of high BW in relation to age, the skeletal load increases disproportionately to the skeletal growth rate and bone mineralization process (Patterson et al., However, bone quality problems in broilers are not exclusively related to their morphological or geometric features. A majority of researchers attribute locomotory difficulties and high frequency of fractures primarily to the deterioration of densitometric properties (Williams et al., Summarizing the results of this study, it can be concluded that bones in FG chickens are longer, wider, and thicker than those in MGH and MGGP chickens. This clearly indicates that the genetic factors determining an increase in BW may also affect the growth and development of bones in the skeleton. However, the densitometric and mechanical quality of the bones in FG chickens significantly deteriorates between 42 and 49 D of life. The observation of MRWT is also disquieting, indicating that the MRWT of longer and thicker bones in FG chickens is comparable to and often lower than that in MGH and MGGP chickens. This finding is of great importance, as alternatives to intensive poultry production are currently being sought, in which longer than 42 D rearing cycle is a necessity. Analysis of the bone quality indices in MGH and MGGP chickens indicates that both genetic groups can be reared up to 56 D of life without any negative effect on their growth due to problems associated with deterioration of leg bone characteristics. In FG chickens, this can be possible if the factors leading to reduced mineralization and elevated bone strength after 35 D of age are eliminated. Considering the results obtained in the current experiment, further studies on bone mineralization in FG chickens after 42 D are recommended, taking into account nutrition changes after this period as well as factors affecting the developmental expansion of bone wall thickness in pelvic limb bones. This research was realized within the project “BIOFOOD—innovative, functional products of animal origin” no. POIG.01.01.02–014–090/09 co-financed by the European Union from the