Interest in the use of natural feed additives in the animal and poultry industries is growing. In the present study, we assessed the effects of dietary supplementation of Astragalus membranaceus root powder (AMP) on the laying performance and serum and egg yolk antioxidant status of laying hens. Four groups (135 each) of laying hens fed a corn- and soybean meal-based diet were supplemented with 0, 5, 10, or 15 g/kg of diet of AMP for 10 wk, and their laying performance and serum and egg yolk antioxidant status were measured. Supplementation of AMP did not affect ADFI or average egg weight but did linearly increase egg mass of the laying hens. Antioxidant status of the serum and egg yolk was improved, as judged by an increase in antioxidant enzymatic activities and a decrease in concentrations of oxidized products, with supplementation of AMP in a dose-dependent manner. In conclusion, supplementing a corn- and soybean meal-based laying hen diet with AMP at levels of 5 to 10 g/kg of diet had the potential to improve the antioxidant status of laying hens and improve laying performance.Reactive oxygen species ( The dried roots of One batch of fresh AM roots [ A 10-wk feeding experiment was conducted at the Research Station of Shandong Agricultural University, Tai-an, China. The animal care and use protocol was approved by the Shandong Agricultural University Animal Nutrition Research Institute. The experiment was a completely randomized design, with different levels of AMP supplementation as the treatments. A total of 540 laying hens (Hy-Line Brown, 27 wk old) were randomly allocated into 20 feeding units (each with 9 cages in 3 levels, with 3 birds/cage) that were then randomly assigned to 4 dietary treatments (5 units/treatment). Each metal wire cage (46 × 50 × 44 cm) was equipped with an independent feeder and 2 nipple drinkers. Feeding units were located randomly inside a ventilated house. The house was maintained at a temperature of 22 ± 2°C and in a daily photoperiod of 16L:8D during the entire experimental period. A corn- and soybean meal-based diet ( The feed residue in each feeding unit was weighed at the end of each feeding week to obtain the ADFI. The number of eggs from each feeding unit was recorded, and the weights of individual eggs were measured daily to determine the daily egg mass (g/d per hen) and laying rate. At wk 5 and 10 of the experiment (32 and 37 wk of the age), 15 eggs (3 per feed unit) were randomly chosen from each treatment to determine antioxidant activity of the egg yolk. On the same dates, 10 laying hens (2 per feed unit) were also randomly selected from each treatment, and a blood sample (5.0 mL) was taken from the wing vein of each hen into an nonheparinized tube for subsequent determination of antioxidant activity of the serum. The blood samples were allowed to clot at 37°C for 2 h and subsequently centrifuged [ All these determinations used spectrophotometric methods and followed the analytical instructions of kits [ Average daily feed intake, egg mass, and FE (ADFI:egg mass) were calculated as the mean value of each unit over the 10-wk experimental period. Antioxidant parameters of egg yolk and serum on 2 sampling dates were calculated, and the mean was used for each sample. Data were analyzed statistically by one-way ANOVA using the GLM procedures of SAS [ All laying hens were healthy, and no mortality was observed during the entire experimental period (data not shown). Average egg weight and ADFI over the 10-wk feeding period were similar among treatments. In contrast, laying rate and egg mass of birds were linearly increased ( The increased egg mass with AMP supplementation was due to the increased laying rate rather than the individual egg weight. Likewise, the tendency for improvement in feed conversion was mainly due to the increased egg mass rather than the effect on feed intake. However, it was not clear why inclusion of AMP led to a linear increase in laying rate. Although AMP and its extract have been used as an immunomodulating agent in both humans and experimental animals and poultry for many years, little information is available on the effects of AMP as a feed additive on the laying performance of hens. Wang et al. [ Supplementing AMP up to a level of 15 g/kg of diet quadratically increased T-SOD ( The increased activities of T-SOD, GSH-Px, and T-AOC but reduced MDA concentration in the serum with AMP supplementation in this study indicated that AMP enhanced the antioxidant status of laying hen serum. This is consistent with the observation of Wang et al. [ The enhanced serum antioxidant status with AMP supplementation in a dose-dependent manner was due to the combined action of antioxidant compounds in AMP. Activity of T-SOD in the egg yolk was not affected by AMP supplemented at either wk 5 or 10, but concentration of MDA in the egg yolk was linearly and quadratically reduced (  Supplementing the diets of laying hens with AMP at levels up to 15 g/kg linearly increased laying rate and egg production but tended ( Supplementing the diets of laying hens with AMP enhanced antioxidant enzyme activities and retarded lipid oxidation in the serum and egg yolk in a dose-dependent manner, with the optimal dietary AMP level being 5 to 10 g/kg of diet. Therefore, AMP is a natural feed additive that has the potential to increase the laying performance of laying hens.