The objectives of this experiment were to study the effects of corn hybrid and chop length of whole-plant corn silage (WPCS) on intake, and to quantify ruminal digestive processes that could help to identify factors limiting dry matter intake (DMI). Eight lactating cows and 4 dry cows fitted with a ruminal cannula were randomly assigned to 4 treatments in a 4×4 Latin square design with replications for lactating cows and without for ruminally cannulated cows. Treatments were fed in a total mixed ration (TMR) containing 75% WPCS and 25% concentrate. The 4 WPCS differed in the characteristics of 2 conventional hybrids, less degradable vs. more degradable in the rumen and in the chop length, fine vs. coarse. The DMI was measured for all cows, and digestion measurements and chewing activities were recorded with the cannulated cows. With lactating cows, DMI and milk yield varied with corn hybrids but not with chop length. The less degradable hybrid in the rumen was the less ingested. Dry matter intake of dry ears followed the same trend, but the differences between hybrids were lower than that observed with the lactating cows and not significant. Dry matter digestibility in the total tract and rumen fill were not different between hybrids. Ruminal mean retention time was greater for the least degradable hybrid. The rumen fill capacity could explain intake differences between hybrids. Ingestive mastication strongly reduced particle size, and the efficiency of particle size reduction was more important with the coarsely chopped WPCS than the finely chopped ones. The small differences in particle size of material entering the rumen after mastication of WPCS during eating might explain the lack of response for decreasing chop length. Because the rumen fill decreased with the decrease in chop length, rumen fill could not be the only factor responsible for DMI control of WPCS.As the genetic potential for dairy cows to produce milk increases, maximum productivity and profitability of high-yielding dairy herds inevitably depend more on nutritional management. An important management goal in nutrition is to maximize energy intake. In Northern Europe, whole-plant corn silage ( Regulation of feed intake combines short-term control of feeding behavior related to the body homeostatic regulation and long-term control that depends on nutritional requirements and body reserves. Feed factors mainly affect short-term control. Numerous studies have been conducted to examine the feedback effects of different postingestive signals on feedback control, which influence the satiation process. Physical signals (rumen fill) and chemical and metabolic signals due to nutrients are generally distinguished ( Objectives for this trial were to study the effects of hybrid and chop length on WPCS intake, giving particular attention to the interrelationships among chewing activity, particle size reduction, rumen fill, ruminal retention time, and voluntary intake. Twelve multiparous Holstein dairy cows were used in this trial—8 lactating cows and 4 dry cows. At trial initiation, lactating cows averaged 62 DIM (range from 33 to 86 d), and 39.1 kg/d of milk (range from 32.4 to 49.1 kg/d). The 4 dry cows (BW The dietary treatments differed in the corn hybrid and chop length of WPCS. Two conventional corn hybrids, a mid-early ( Daily amounts of feed offered and orts for individual cows were weighed and recorded. Samples of WCPS and orts for individual cows were collected on d 15 to 29, and DM was determined daily (48 Lactating cows were milked twice daily, and production was recorded at each milking. Milk samples were taken from a.m. and p.m. milking on 4 consecutive days per week during the experimental period (from d 15 to 18 and from d 22 to 25). Chewing activity was measured on cannulated cows for 3 consecutive days (from d 24 to 26), using a harness and sensors connected to pressure-gauge transducers. Signals from the transducers were recorded to determine ingestion and ruminating times. All the digestion measurements were realized on cannulated cows. Apparent total tract digestibility was determined by daily total fecal collection from d 15 to 20. To divide urine from feces, a tube connected with a urine collector was fixed on each cow. Feces were weighed and mixed before sampling (5% fresh weight). Fecal samples were pooled for each cow and period, dried (80°C for 48 The fractional digesta passage was determined from a single dose of Eu (20 The fractional passage rate of the ruminal fluid was determined using chromium-EDTA. A single dose of 2 Fifteen samples (50 At the end of each period (on d 29), the rumen was manually emptied 5 When rumen was empty, the cows were fed WPCS alone. Boluses of WPCS chewed and delivered via the cardia were collected by hand through the rumen cannula. Eight boluses were pooled for each animal per period and stored at −20°C for sieve analysis. At the end of the trial, the WPCS degradation rate was measured with an in situ technique. Dried samples of WPCS, corresponding to the 2 hybrids, were ground to pass a 3-mm sieve in a hammer mill. Approximately 3 Feed, orts, and fecal samples were analyzed for ash, CP ( Silage fermentation characteristics were measured on WPCS juice obtained with a grape press. The pH was immediately determined with a pH-meter (CG840, Ag/AgCl electrode, Schott Gerate, Hofheim, Germany). Acetic acid and ethanol contents were determined by GLC ( Particle-size distribution in WPCS, boluses, and rumen contents was determined by wet sieving ( Chromium-EDTA in the rumen fluid and europium content of feces, after extraction of the marker from dried samples ( Ruminal liquid was analyzed for VFA with a GLC procedure ( Milk fat and protein concentrations were determined by infrared spectrophotometry (Combi-Foss 5000, Foss Electric, Hillerød, Denmark). Data obtained with lactating cows were analyzed by using the general linear model procedure ( Chemical composition and fermentation characteristics of WPCS are presented in Particle-size distribution of WPCS is presented in In situ DM and NDF degradabilities were significantly lower ( With the lactating cows, total DMI was 1.5 kg/d lower ( Milk, fat, and protein yields averaged 2.8 kg/d ( Chewing activities and digestion measurements were achieved with dry, ruminally cannulated cows. Total DMI by dry, ruminally cannulated cows varied in the same way as DMI by lactating cows. Total DMI was 0.7 kg/d lower for H1 than H2 WPCS diets ( Eating, ruminating, and total chewing times were not affected by either hybrid or chop length, averaging 328, 613, and 941 min/d, respectively ( In boluses, mean particle size, extent of dispersion (s75-s25), and LP2 proportion were statistically similar between the treatments, on average 0.24 Apparent total tract DM and nutrient digestibilities were unaffected by diets (  Ruminal fermentation characteristics are presented in The VFA and ammonia concentration represented average values from the 3 sampling times. Total VFA concentration; molar proportion of acetate, propionate, or butyrate, and ammonia concentration did not vary significantly between diets ( In this trial, we found significant differences in DMI and milk yield between 2 conventional hybrids. In literature, most studies dealing with hybrid effect on intake compared conventional hybrids and brown midrib mutation. Variable responses were reported. On average, brown midrib increased DMI ( Although mean particle size of WPCS was similar with the two corn hybrids, time spent eating and chewing per unit of DMI was higher for H1 than H2 silage diets. To our knowledge, little information is available about the effect of corn hybrid on chewing behavior. Except the trials concerning chop length that we will discuss later, time spent chewing was related negatively to DM content and digestibility ( The H1 hybrid was less acidic than H2. The mean ruminal pH and the minimum pH were lower with H1 hybrid and the time pH In summary, the less degradable hybrid in the rumen is also the less ingested and the less acidic. The difference in ruminal degradation rate was sufficient to induce differences in voluntary intake without significant variation in digestibility. Rumen fill probably played an important role, limiting intake in this case, because the rumen fill of cows consuming the less or the more highly degradable silages was similar. In our trial, decreasing chop length modified neither DMI nor milk yield. With corn silage finely chopped by recutting of forage ( In our trial, chewing behavior did not vary with the chop length, but ingestive mastication strongly reduced mean particle size and LP2 proportion of WPCS by 80 and 34%, respectively. With corn silages, either no effect of chopping length on eating time was reported ( In our trial, neither apparent DM digestibility nor ruminal mean retention time varied with the chop length of WPCS. When animals were offered ad libitum access to feeds, variations in DMI were regularly associated with changes in DM digestibility of forages, and a physical control of DMI would play an important role in these circumstances. Dry matter intake depends on digestibility, rates of digestion, particle passage, and particle-size reduction in the rumen. These relationships suggest that rumen fill limits DMI. But, if rumen fill was the only factor limiting intake, the cows consuming the finely chopped WPCS should have been able to increase intake because they had lower rumen fill than cows feeding on the coarsely chopped WPCS. Recent data obtained with silages ( Significant intake and lactation performance differences were observed between hybrids, with the highest value of intake for the more degradable hybrid in the rumen. There was no benefit from decreasing TCL in WPCS for increasing intake. Ingestive mastication strongly reduced particle size, and the efficiency of particle size reduction was more important with the coarsely chopped WPCS than the finely chopped ones. The small differences in particle size of material entering the rumen after mastication of WPCS during eating might explain the lack of response to decreased chop length. Rumen fill did not vary with hybrid but decreased with decreasing TCL of corn silages. A physical intake-regulating factor does not seem to have acted alone in controlling WPCS intake. Other studies are necessary to identify possible DMI limiting changes in relation to ruminal process when cows are allowed to consume corn silages. The authors would like to thank D. Roux and F. Anglard for assistance in sample collection and A. Ollier and L. Genestoux for skilled technical support.