Xiangjiaba hydropower station is one of the cascade power stations on the Jinsha River, China. Due to the complicated geological conditions of its dam foundation, evaluating the rock mass quality and determining the mechanical parameters of rock masses are very important issues. To address these issues, several groups of rock borehole shear tests (RBSTs) were conducted on the black mudstone in the dam foundation of Xiangjiaba hydropower station in the second construction phase. Forty three groups of shear strengths of black mudstone samples were obtained from RBSTs, and the shear strength parameters (c and f) were calculated using the least squares method. In addition, the limitations and merits of RBST employed in the Xiangjiaba hydropower station were discussed. Test results indicate that the shear strength parameters obtained from RBST have a good correlation with the results from sound wave test in borehole. It is believed that RBST has a good adaptability and applicability in geotechnical engineering.Since the rock borehole shear test (RBST) apparatus, a new device to determine shear strength of rock masses in a 76 For a rock project, how to reasonably determine the mechanical parameters of rock masses is one of the most important issues ( Because the Limeiwan fold passes through the Xiangjiaba dam site, the site-specific geological conditions are extremely complicated. Thus, it is difficult to determine the mechanical parameters of rock masses using conventional test methods. Thereby, the RBST was recommended for the shear strength determination of rock masses in the dam foundation. The detailed RBST process and results for Xiangjiaba hydropower station will be discussed below. The general structure of RBST apparatus and the test method ( where The test apparatus consists of shear head, pumps of normal pressure and pulling strength, pulling jack, leveling plate, special pier, acme threaded rod, oil lines, etc. Shear head is the key element of RBST apparatus. There are two opposite shear plates on shear head, and on each plate there are two hardened steel-tungsten-carbide teeth. The shear plates are mounted on the ends of a double-acting hydraulic cylinder capable of applying a maximum force up to approximately 50 kN, which are rated at 35 The pulling jack, installed at the top of rock borehole, applies the shear stress on the shear plates through pulling the acme threaded rod ( The pressure control device includes a manual hydraulic pump, two hydraulic pressure gauges and the selector valves of normal and shear stresses ( With several groups of RBST data, the shear strength parameters of rock masses, including the internal friction coefficient where In a rock borehole, various RBSTs can be conducted at different depths and the shear strength parameters of rocks in this area can be determined easily from different boreholes. The main RBST procedure is described as follows: Equipment installation. According to the requirements of the equipment connection, all parts of RBST equipment should be installed precisely and no oil leakage should occur. Normal pressure adjustment. Put the shear head in a borehole at a certain depth, and fix the acme threaded rod with a special pier on the pulling jack which is located on the leveling plate. The rod should be kept at the center of the borehole. Then, close the shear pressure valve and open the normal pressure valve, apply the seating pressure to make the teeth on the shear plate press into the rock mass, and keep 5 Application of normal and shear stresses. Apply the normal pressure to a certain level, and keep several minutes until the normal stress reaches a stable value. Then, close the normal pressure valve, open the shear pressure valve to apply the shear stress, and read the shear stress value from the gauge when it reaches the maximum value. Preparation of next test. After the test, release the shear and normal stresses, remove the shear plates and pull the shear head out of borehole. Record the failure characters of rocks and then clean the shear plates ready for the next test. For the RBST in this study, the method of normal and shear stresses applied refers to the rock shear test in the Chinese specifications for rock tests in water conservancy and hydroelectric engineering. In the RBST, because the strain under a certain stress cannot be obtained, the next test stress will be applied when this stress value is stable. Xiangjiaba hydropower station, with an installed capacity of 6 400 The gravity dam is constructed on the foundation of the Triassic system, including the top Triassic Xujiahe group (T In this study, the RBSTs were conducted at the bottom slab of stilling basin in water release dam section of Xiangjiaba hydropower station, as shown in In the test site, 43 groups of RBSTs were performed. The borehole diameter is about 80 After the RBST, the rock fragment on the shear plates and the failure mode of the rocks surrounding the borehole are shown in From the RBSTs conducted in the dam foundation of Xiangjiaba hydropower station, 43 groups of shear strengths of black mudstone samples were obtained. The scatter diagram of 43 groups of RBST data obtained from rock boreholes RBX-1–12 is shown in The histograms of shear strength parameters of black mudstone in the dam foundation of Xiangjiaba hydropower station are shown in In Xiangjiaba hydropower station, the advantages of RBST compared with conventional in-situ normal shear test can be observed, which are of simplicity, high efficiency and good application. Thus, RBST can be utilized in exploration drilling. In addition, the shear strength parameters of rocks in different spatial orientations can also be obtained from the RBST in the rock boreholes. On the other hand, the RBST also has its limitations, for example, small shear area and shallow shear depth because of small steel teeth (1 In this paper, the results of triaxial compression test or direct shear test on foundation rocks are not collected, but the shear strength parameters obtained from RBST are compared with those recommended by geological engineers. According to the recommended parameters, the internal friction coefficients of rock mass of class IV are 0.55–0.75, and the cohesion values are 0.3–0.6 At Xiangjiaba hydropower station, RBST and sound wave test were conducted in the rock boreholes RBX-2 and RBX-6 in the dam foundation. The shear strength parameters ( For the rock masses in shallow depths of borehole RBX-2 were seriously damaged, the internal friction coefficients of rock mass obtained at depths of 1.5 and 1.9 In the correlation analysis of internal friction coefficient and acoustic velocity, the correlation coefficient of From the above correlation analysis, the relation of internal friction coefficient and acoustic velocity, obtained from the RBST in the rock boreholes RBX-2 and RBX-6, can be expressed as At present, the relevant test data for shear strength parameters are scarce. From those limited data, it can be seen that the shear strength parameters of rock mass have a good correlation with the acoustic velocity. But further study on drillability and acoustic velocity is needed. At Xiangjiaba hydropower station, the RBSTs were conducted on black mudstone in the dam foundation. Based on the test results, some conclusions can be drawn as follows: The shear strength parameters of rock mass were calculated from 43 groups of RBST data, and the average values of The relationship between the internal friction coefficient and acoustic velocity was obtained using the least squares method. There is a clear linear correlation between From the RBST, the shear strength parameters are smaller than those obtained from the conventional tests. According to the experiences of USA and Japan, the internal friction coefficient Compared with the in-situ conventional shear test, the advantages of RBST are of simplicity, high efficiency and good correlation. This paper tries to present a method to obtain the shear strengths of rocks in large geotechnical projects. However, for the drawbacks of RBST, further study is necessary to support the basis of RBST application to geotechnical engineering.  Yufei Zhao (Engineer) is now working at the Department of Geotechnical Engineering, China Institute of Water Resources and Hydropower Research (IWHR) since 2005. He got his Master degree (Geotechnical Engineering) from IWHR in 2005. His experience includes: (1) Bachelor of mining engineering, Hebei University of Engineering, China (September 1998–June 2002); (2) Master of Geotechnical Engineering, IWHR, China (September 2002–April 2005); (3) Assistant Engineer, the Department of Geotechnical Engineering, IWHR, China (April 2005–April 2008); (4) Engineer, the Department of Geotechnical Engineering, IWHR, China (April 2008–present). His major specialties include rock mechanics and engineering, the test and monitoring techniques for rock mass, geotechnical engineering and engineering geology. Contact information: Department of Geotechnical Engineering, China Institute of Water Resources and Hydropower Research No. 20, Chegongzhuang Weat Road, Beijing, 100048, China Tel: + We wish to express our deep gratitude to Geophysical Exploration and Testing Center, HydroChina Zhongnan Engineering Corporation, for providing important rock mass acoustic velocity data of black mudstone during the RBST at Xiangjiaba hydropower station.