Background aims
                  Stem cells derived from human adipose tissue (ASC) have the capacity for renewal, are easily obtained and have plasticity properties that allow them to differentiate into several cell types, including osteoblast cells. With the aim of understanding the issue of the osteogenic process and finding reliable biomarkers in cells undergoing the osteogeneic differentiation process, this work took advantage of a proteomic approach to identify proteins involved in osteogenesis.
               
                  Methods
                  For this purpose, ASC were analyzed under three conditions: S0, in the absence of stimulation; S1, with 2 weeks of osteogenic medium stimulation; and S2, with 4 weeks of osteogenic medium stimulation. The identification of ASC was carried out by flow cytometry using antibodies specific to known undifferentiated stem cell-surface markers. Cell viability, enzymatic activity, mineral deposition, collagen structure and production and gene analyzes were evaluated for each condition.
               
                  Results
                  Phenotypic modifications were observed during the in vitro osteogenic differentiation process by two-dimensional (2-D) differential image gel electrophoresis (DIGE). The proteins were identified by mass espectrometry in tandem (MS/MS) analyzes using Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization with TOF/TOF is a tandem mass spectrometry method where two time-of-flight mass spectrometers are used consecutively (MALDI-TOF/TOF). A total of 51 differentially expressed proteins was identified when comparing the three observed conditions. Sixteen different spots were identified in the S0 stage compared with S2, while 28 different spots were found in S2 compared with S0. S1 expressed seven different spots compared with S0 and S2.
               
                  Conclusions
                  These findings suggest the involvement of several proteins directly related to the osteogenic pathway, which can be used to improve understanding of the osteogenic process.Interest in human stem cells continues to grow with respect to questions regarding the fundamental mechanisms of cell development, differentiation and disease progression. Studies have focused on generating reliable living replacements for damaged tissues resulting from numerous diseases ( Because MSC are obtained using minimally invasive procedures, are easily cultured at a high replication rate and display Bone tissue is a highly specialized form of mineralized connective tissue that is involved in distinct biologic and mechanical functions. The osteogenic process is primarily seen in the differentiation of mesenchymal stromal cells into bone-forming, differentiating osteoblast cells. Osteoblast differentiation is tightly controlled by the sequential activation of several transcription factors, such as Cbfa, osterix and AP1, together with hormones like parathormone, leptin and estrogen. These factors regulate the expression of specific genes involved in the development of osteoblast cells ( The spatial and temporal regulation of the osteogenic differentiation process is not completely understood at either cellular or molecular levels. This situation leads to unreliable therapeutic strategies, and opens up a considerable field for the investigation of biologic markers that could be used to describe specific proteins in these cells during the induction of osteogenesis. Proteomic techniques offer invaluable tools that make possible the study of phenotype alterations aimed at a better understanding of osteogenic induction as a process ( The purpose of this work was to analyze the phenotype of ASC cells during the osteogenic process by searching for differences in protein profiles during different stages of osteogenic-induced culture. After two-dimensional (2-D) differential image gel electrophoresis (DIGE) analyzes and protein identification by MS/MS, we were able to identify proteins that can provide important information about the osteogenic process Human adipose tissue was obtained with informed consent from three healthy female patients (aged 25, 38 and 55 years) who had been subjected to liposuction surgery for esthetic reasons at the Núcleo de Cirurgia Plástica (a private clinic located in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais, Brazil), as approved by the Comitê de Ética na Pesquisa (COEPE), Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (Ethics Committee of the Federal University of Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil; process number ETIC 361/16). These donors were not reported to have diabetes, hepatitis, metabolic diseases or other systemic complications. Isolation and culturing of ASC were performed as described previously ( The adherent cells were detached with 0.25% trypsin/EDTA and centrifuged for 5 After primary culture in the control medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 After the fourth passage and 28 days of culture, ASC that were undergoing osteogenic stimulation (S1 and S2) and those that were undifferentiated (S0) were harvested. Protein extraction was performed as follows. Medium was removed from the flasks and cells were washed three times with Tris-buffered sucrose (10 Protein extracts were separated by 2-DE DIGE as reported previously ( Spots with differential expression were excised, and the gel fragments were washed in 25 MS and tandem MS analysis were performed using a MALDI-TOF/TOF AutoFlex III instrument in positive/reflector mode controlled by the FlexControl™ software. Instrument calibration was achieved using Peptide Calibration Standard II (Bruker Daltonics) as a reference; α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid was used as the matrix. Samples were spotted on MTP AnchorChip™ 600/384 (Bruker Daltonics) targets using standard protocols for the dried droplet method. Trypsin and keratin contamination peaks were excluded from the peak lists used in the database search. Ionization was performed in MS and MS/MS Post source decay (PSD-LIFT technology) by irradiation of a nitrogen laser (337 Stromal cells were obtained by collagenase digestion of the liposuction surgery product and cultivated After subjecting ASC to three different conditions (S0, non-induced control population; S1, 14 days after osteogenic stimulation as a matrix production population; S2, 28 days after osteogenic stimulation representing the terminally differentiated population), the cells were submitted to an MTT metabolic activity assay to confirm cell viability. The formation of formazan crystal, shown by micrographs in all three situations ( In order to evaluate the The quantification of collagen secretion was determined with a Sircol assay. The detection and quantification of collagen demonstrated that ASC collagen production in the S0 ( The matrix mineralization was visualized by calcium detection in the osteogenic induction during ASC differentiation. Cells stimulated with OM for 2 weeks (S1) showed a mineralized core ( ASC undergoing osteogenic induction showed a gradual collagen fiber orientation feature under a polar light microscope compared with S0 (data not shown). This result indicated initial extracellular matrix maturation based on the linearity of the collagen fiber direction and high density of collagen fiber gathering. cDNA samples from ASC submitted to S0, S1 and S2 conditions were evaluated by PCR for the presence of ostegenesis markers (COL-I, BMP-4, LAMP-1 and OC). GAPDH was used as a control. Cells in S0 stage did not express osteogenesis marker genes ( The occurrence of differences in the proteomic profile during the osteogenic process was revealed by means of 2-D DIGE experiments ( An interesting observation related to the S1 stage was that some of the identified spots found exclusively in S1 reveled proteins such as fibulin-1, also found in a different position in 2-D gels from S2 samples, indicating post-translational modifications in such proteins ( Important gaps in ASC research need to be filled regarding the current knowledge of these cells, as they are still too poorly understood to be used as a possible source for cell-based therapy ( The results of the phenotypic analysis of ASC performed by flow cytometry showed that most of the population tested positive for mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) markers and also for a specific ASC marker, confirming the homogeneity of the ASC population ( Finally, the analysis of pooled samples from three different donors by 2-D DIGE gels showed different spot patterns in each stage examined compared with other stages (interstage differences). On the other hand, the protein profiles of cells from different donors within the S0, S1 and S2 stages showed a high degree of protein homogeneity (low variance in intrastage groups) ( An important issue is that the S1 stage seems to represent a transition between S0 and S2, as all the proteins identified in this stage were also present in stages S0 and S2. Nevertheless, seven spots were observed uniquely in S1 stage samples and could stand for a transient phenotype that seems to be modified by the continuous use of OM, as show in stage S2. Some of the specific spots identified for S1 were indeed proteins that also appeared in different relative positions in 2-D gels from S2 samples, indicating post-translational modification (PTM) processes occurred between these two stages. However, the continuous use of OM is critical to complete osteogenic differentiation, as after the S1 stage cells lose some proteins related to the S0 stage. In a stage-specific context, a group of five proteins expressed in S1 and S2, but not in S0, was identified as possible candidates for evaluating the specific ostegenesis process. Laminin was found only in stages S0 and S1 and could be a possible cut-off point between stem cells and the osteoblastic phenotype. After a vast literature search, the group of six proteins described below seems to be the most relevant in this initial description, because they have strict relationships with osteogenesis. It should be stressed out that the functionality of these proteins seems strongest when they are analyzed together, as discussed below. The first of the five proteins identified as a late osteogenic marker was superoxide dismutase (SOD). This enzyme was found to be expressed in stages S1 and S2, and plays an important role in cell proliferation and metabolism. The ultrasound shock waves used in the treatment of injured bones uses SOD as an important mediator in the cell growth population ( Another protein was identified as filamin A, which was identified in stages S1 and S2. Filamin A participates in the strong interaction between collagen-rich surfaces and integrin B1, and its increase promotes cellular distribution in the collagen matrix, increases the viability of tissue cells and reduces the chance of apoptosis ( Heat-shock protein-27 (HSP-27) was also identified in stages S1 and S2. The expression of HSP-27 is stimulated by prostaglandin D2 (PGD2). PGD2 seems to play a crucial role in bone metabolism, acting as an autacoid and suppressing the synthesis of both osteoprotegerin and RANKL, leading to an anabolic response. The phosphorylated HSP-27 may be involved in the activation of proteins in metabolic pathways or structural functionality in osteoblasts cells ( Another important protein found to be differentially expressed in stages S1 and S2 was cathepsin D. The expression of this protein is related to an increase in cell migration. High levels of cathepsin D may also be related to a slowdown in the process of mineralization of the bone matrix. Its expression seems to be greater in cells undergoing osteoblastic differentiation than in undifferentiated stem cells ( Finally, the last protein discussed here that is related to osteogenesis and was present in stages S1 and S2 is fibulin 1. The glycoprotein fibulin is one of the most highly conserved calcium-binding proteins, and is known as a component of the extracellular matrix of human osteoblasts. High secretion levels of fibulins 1 and 2 are common in osteoblasts. Fibulins have an ability to reduce the proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells by their interference in the adhesion of CD34 Laminin was found to be expressed only in stages S0 and S1, and could potentially be used as a biomarker to identify undifferentiated stem cells from cells undergoing late differentiation. Laminin is a protein with structural importance, and is considered the most relevant adhesion molecule of stem cells that connects with the extracellular matrix ( The initial results obtained in this work give new insights regarding the behavior of osteogenic change using an ASC population as a source of stem cells. The changes observed in stages S0, S1 and S2, confirmed by gene analyzes, enzymatic assays and a proteomic approach, support the idea of osteogenesis cell compromise. The identification of six proteins closely related to the osteogenic process opens new avenues for their possible use, in association with other methods, as biomarkers for the detection of cells undergoing osteogenesis. Additional efforts are still necessary in order to characterize these proteins better and understand their specific roles in the osteogenic process, this being a critical point for cell therapy and clinical approaches. This investigation was supported by 