Rumen passage kinetics of forage and concentrate fiber were analyzed to determine intrinsic feed effects and extrinsic ration effects on the retention time of fiber in the rumen. Sixteen Danish Holstein cows (557±37kg of body weight, 120±21d in milk, mean ± SD), 8 fitted with ruminal cannulas, were used in a completely randomized block experiment. Treatments differed in forage type (corn silage vs. grass silage) and forage:concentrate ratio (50:50 vs. 75:25 on organic matter basis). Fiber passage kinetics were studied based on rumen evacuations and on marker excretion profiles in feces fitted to 1 and 2 pool models. Each cow received ytterbium (Yb)-labeled fiber of the forage fed in the ration, samarium (Sm)-labeled fiber of the forage not fed in the ration, and concentrate fiber labeled with lanthanum (La), all as a single pulse dose. Nineteen fecal grab samples were taken per cow. Rumen liquid passage was studied using chromium-EDTA dosed as a single pulse into the rumen, followed by sampling of rumen liquid from both the ventral and medial rumen. Rumen mean retention time did not differ between forages when based on Yb-excretion profiles but was numerically longer for grass silage– than for corn silage–based rations using rumen evacuation data. Liquid rate of passage did not differ when calculated from medial or ventral rumen liquid samples, indicating that estimates for the probability of rumen liquid escape were independent of rumen sampling site. Total mean retention time decreased from forage fiber to concentrate fiber to liquid. The forage type itself (corn silage or grass silage) rather than the ration composition seemed to determine the total-tract retention time of forage fiber.Fiber is a major energy source in ruminant feedstuffs. Fiber digestion and passage behavior determine the net energy value of a ration because the cell contents are almost completely digestible. Fiber digestibility in the rumen is the result of the competitive processes digestion and passage and, although increased retention time of feed particles in the rumen increases digestibility, it also decreases feed intake ( Fractional rate of passage can be affected by extrinsic or intrinsic factors. Extrinsic factors are related to animal and ration characteristics ( Feedstuff type influences the rate of particle breakdown and the distribution between large and small particles in the rumen mat. Longer retention times of forage compared with concentrate particles have been reported ( Passage studies have been done with the help of particulate-associated markers (  The hypotheses were that extrinsic (ration) characteristics influence passage kinetics relatively more than intrinsic (forage type) characteristics and that corn silage fiber remains in the rumen longer than grass silage fiber. The objectives were to study intrinsic (feed type) and extrinsic (ration) effects on passage kinetics. The experiment complied with the guidelines of Danish Ministry of Justice law number 382 (June 10, 1987) act number 726 (September 9, 1993) concerning experiments with animals and the care of experimental animals. Sixteen Danish Holstein cows (557 Cows within the blocks were randomly allocated to 1 of 4 experimental rations. The experiment lasted 37 Rations were based on corn silage (variety Adept) harvested October 26, 2010, with a theoretical chopping length of 8.5 Corn silage was ensiled in a bunker silo and re-ensiled for experimental purposes in round bales with 11 layers of 25-µm plastic using an Orkel MP 2000 Compactor processor (Orkel A/S, Fannrem, Norway). Grass was prewilted 2 Corn silage or grass silage was fed in a TMR with a 75:25 or 50:50 F:C ratio (OM basis), which resulted in 4 rations: corn silage–based ration with 75:25 F:C ratio ( Forage fiber (5.76 Chromium-EDTA was prepared according to Each of the 4 cows on the same ration received a single dose of Yb-labeled fiber of the forage fed in the ration, a single dose of Sm-labeled fiber of the opposite forage, and La-labeled concentrate fiber, as shown in Three hundred grams of Cr-EDTA solution was mixed with 5 Rumen evacuations were done on d 25 according to block at either 0800 or 1030 Daily milk yield (2 milkings) was recorded once per week and milk samples taken for fat, protein, and lactose analyses with an Msc4000 infrared analyzer (Eurofins Steins Laboratorium, Holstebro, Denmark). Dry matter content of the samples was determined after drying in a forced-air oven at 60°C for 48 Chromium in rumen liquid was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy at 357.9 nm in the supernatant after centrifugation for 10 min at 4,000 × Ytterbium, Sm, and La in freeze-dried feed and feces samples were simultaneously analyzed using inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (XSeries ICP-MS, Thermo Fisher Scientific Germany Ltd. & Co. KG, Bonn, Germany). Marker excretion profiles in feces were fitted to several 1-pool and 2-pool models that differed in orders of age-dependency. Model assumptions and the corresponding biological background are described in detail by The SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC) program in Liquid fractional passage rate ( Energy-corrected milk (3.14 MJ/kg) was calculated as follows: ECM All statistical analyses were performed using R program version 2.14.0 ( Differences in mean CMRT between Yb and La and between La and liquid were tested using the Wilcoxon test because of variance heterogeneity ( Effects of F:C ratio and labeled forage fiber on TMRT were tested using Yb and Sm data together in a model that included fixed effects of block, forage, F:C ratio, restricted DMI, marker, interactions between forage and F:C ratio, interactions between marker and forage, and between marker and F:C ratio, and interactions between marker, forage, and F:C ratio. Marker within cow was included as repeated measurement. All results were reported as treatment means. Dry matter intake was 3 Rumen mean retention time of iNDF was 36.9 Passage rate of Yb from the age-dependent pool (λ) was higher for Passage rate of Sm from the first, age-dependent pool (λ) decreased with increasing F:C ratio ( Time elapsed before first marker appearance in feces (τ) increased with increasing F:C ratio ( In corn silage–based rations, TMRT was higher for Yb-labeled corn silage (36.7 The numerically longer RRT of grass silage–based rations (46.9 The F:C ratio in the ration did not systematically alter RRT of grass silage– and corn silage–based rations based on the rumen evacuation method and iNDF flow. For grass silage rations, an increased F:C ratio numerically increased (+7 Forage:concentrate ratio did not affect rumen liquid pool and liquid passage rate in the present study. Rumen liquid pool, however, increased numerically (+13 A longer retention time of Yb in the second pool compared with the first pool was shown for both forage types. This indicates that the age-independent passage of aged particles out of the rumen, not the release of particles from the first pool, was the limiting step for the escape of labeled fiber particles from the rumen for corn silage, grass silage, and concentrates. This supports earlier findings ( Ytterbium-labeled corn silage fiber was retained for less time than Yb-labeled grass silage fiber before particles were released from the first pool, consistent with The shorter CMRT1 of Yb-labeled corn silage fiber compared with Yb-labeled grass silage fiber could be due to smaller particle size (chopping length) of corn silage than grass silage. The F:C ratio did not affect CMRT of Yb-labeled forage and La-labeled concentrate fiber, which is in accordance with Rare earths and Cr are the most frequently used external markers to study passage kinetics of particulate matter. Chromium has been criticized for altering physical characteristics and the digestibility of labeled feedstuffs ( Besides very low estimates for fiber CMRT, low time delay values resulted from the use of the G4G1 model to fit Yb-excretion profiles. Comparison of G4G1 estimated time delay values (5 Ytterbium-labeled forage fiber CMRT based on the G4G1 model averaged 30 Comparing differences in retention times between corn silage and grass silage fiber derived by either of the methods revealed that CMRT based on Yb-excretion profiles in feces fitted to the G4G1 model was similar for grass silage fiber (29.8 The discrepancy between the methods could, moreover, be caused by differences in model assumptions. Passage kinetics based on the rumen evacuation method and iNDF flow are determined for the total ration, and an allocation of passage kinetics to one specific feedstuff is not possible ( Differences in characteristics of unlabeled and labeled feedstuffs could have caused the contradictory results in RRT between the 2 methods used. The RRT estimated with the rumen evacuation technique is that of the consumed grass and corn silage iNDF in combination with the ration, whereas the marker approach estimates the passage behavior of labeled feedstuff fiber that had undergone boiling, labeling, and acidifying processes and had a lower DM content than unlabeled feedstuffs (data not shown). Total mean retention time, rather than CMRT, was used to study the relative importance of intrinsic (forage type) and extrinsic (ration composition) factors on fiber retention time. Compartmental mean retention time depends on the pool model chosen to fit marker excretion profiles, whereas similar estimates of TMRT independent of the 2-pool model used were reported by The forage fed in the ration was always labeled with Yb, whereas the forage not fed in the ration was always labeled with Sm to allow analysis of main effects of forage type fed in the ration with Yb marker excretion profiles. To distinguish effects of forage type from effects of ration composition on the retention time of fiber, marker excretion profiles of Yb-labeled fiber of the same forage as fed in the ration and Sm-labeled fiber of the forage not fed in the ration were analyzed together. As illustrated in The nonsignificant effect of marker type, moreover, indicated that the rare-earth markers Yb and Sm behaved similarly whether bound to corn or to grass silage fiber. Lanthanum-labeled concentrate fiber remained numerically longer in the second age-independent pool than in the first age-dependent pool, independent of the ration composition. Lanthanum-labeled concentrate fiber CMRT, moreover, was not affected by ration composition, which was comparable to that of forage fiber. Longer CMRT of Yb-labeled forage fiber than of La-labeled concentrate fiber is consistent with previous findings ( Forage type itself, rather than ration composition, seemed to determine total-tract retention time of forage fiber, as labeled corn silage fiber remained longer in the digestive tract than did labeled grass silage fiber, independent of ration composition or rare-earth marker The authors gratefully acknowledge A. C. Storm, N. B. Kristensen, T. Hvelplund, and M. Larsen from the Department of Animal Science (Aarhus University, Tjele, Denmark), P. Huhtanen from the Department of Agricultural Research for Northern Sweden (Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Umeå, Sweden), and K.-H. Südekum from the Institute of Animal Science (University of Bonn, Germany) for their advice and comments to the experimental design and marker preparation. We thank T. N. Jakobsen, B. H. Løth, and staff from Department of Animal Science (Aarhus University) for their skillful practical assistance. The project was funded by Mælkeafgiftsfonden and Aarhus University.