Recently, continuous breakthroughs have been made about deep gold prospecting in the Jiaodong gold province area of China. Approximately 5000 t of cumulative gold resources have been explored in Jiaodong, which has thus become an internationally noteworthy gold ore cluster. The gold exploration depth has been increased to about 2000 m from the previous <1000 m. To further explore the mineralization potential of the Jiaodong area at a depth of about 3000 m, the Shandong Institute of Geological Sciences has drilled an exploratory drillhole named “Deep drillhole ZK01” to a depth of 3266 m. Hence, as reported herein, the mineralization characteristics of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt have been successfully documented. ZK01 is, to date, the deepest borehole with an gold intersect in China, and constitutes a significant advance in deep gold prospecting in China. The findings of this study further indicate that the depth interval of 2000 m to 4000 m below the ground surface in the Wuyi Village area incorporates 912 t of inferred gold resources, while the depth interval of 2000 m to 4000 m below the surface across the Jiaodong area possesses about 4000 t of inferred gold resources. The Jiaojia Fault Belt tends to gently dip downward, having dip angles of about 25° and about 20° at vertical depths of 2000 m and 2850 m, respectively. The deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt differs from the shallow and moderately deep parts about fracturing, alteration, mineralization, and tectonic type. The deep zones can generally be categorized from inside outward as cataclastic granite, granitic cataclasite, weakly beresitized granitic cataclasite, beresitized cataclasite, and gouge. These zones exhibit a gradual transitional relation or occur alternately and repeatedly. The mineralization degree of the pyritized cataclastic granite-type ore in the deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt is closely related to the degree of pyrite vein development; that is, the higher the pyrite content, the wider the veins and the higher the gold grade. Compared to the shallow gold ores, the deep-seated gold ores have higher fineness and contain joseite, tetradymite, and native bismuth, suggesting that the deep gold mineralization temperature is higher and that mantle-sourced material may have contributed to this mineralization. ZK01 has also revealed that the deep-seated ore bodies in the Jiaojia metallogenic belt are principally situated above the main fracture plane (gouge) and hosted within the Linglong Granite, contradicting previous findings indicating that the moderately shallow gold ore bodies are usually hosted in the contact zone between the Linglong Granite and Jiaodong Group or meta-gabbro. These new discoveries are particularly significant because they can help correct mineralization prospecting models, determine favorable positions for deep prospecting, and improve metallogenic prediction and resource potential evaluation.Recently, about 5000 t of accumulative gold resource reserves were identified in Jiaodong ( Since 2011, continuous and significant breakthroughs have been made about deep prospecting of large gold belts such as those at Sanshandao, Jiaojia, and Zhaoping in Jiaodong, which hold about 3000 t of additional resources ( The Shandong Institute of Geological Sciences has created a 3266 m scientific drillhole named “Deep drillhole ZK01” in 2016 in the Jiaojia Fault Belt at Wuyi Village, Laizhou City. This drillhole is the first deep exploration drillhole in the Jiaojia metallogenic belt as well as China’s first deep drillhole with intersected hard-rock gold mineralization and constitutes a significant advance in deep-gold exploration in China. The present study reports the successful definition of the gold ore bodies in the deep part of the Jiaojia Fault Belt based on samples obtained via ZK01. Hence, the gold mineralization characteristics of the deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt (at 3000 m) that intersects a new gold layer are revealed and first-hand data on the deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt are reported. The implications of these characteristics are also discussed. The Jiaodong Peninsula is located in the southeastern portion of the North China Craton and the western margin of the Pacific Plate. The Jiaodong Peninsula is bordered by the Tancheng-Lujiang Fault belt to the west and the Dabie-Sulu ultrahigh-pressure metamorphic belt to the southeast. This peninsula is principally composed of Pre-Cambrian basement rocks and has undergone Mesozoic tectonic-magmatism ( The Jiaojia Fault is a metallogenic structural belt having the most densely developed gold deposits in northwestern Jiaodong. This fault belt is generally divided into three segments at the surface from north to south: The Sizhuang, Matang-Xincheng, and Xincheng-Gaojiazhuangzi segments. The fault extends to about 60 km, with strikes of 35°–40° and dips of 30°–50°, along with local dips of 80°. Its maximum thickness is up to 1000 m. As it is separated by the main fracture plane, the alteration zone appear to display symmetrical zoning. The gold ore bodies in the shallow part of the Jiaojia Fault Belt (above–1500 m) are mainly hosted in the highly altered rocks of the hanging wall below the main fracture plane and are characterized by disseminated or veinlet-disseminated mineralization. In recent years, large gold deposits in the depth of Sizhuan and Jiaojia, as well as in the shallow of Zhuguolijia, Nanlü-Xinmu, Shaling, and Qianchen deposits have been successively discovered in the central-southern segment of the Jiaojia Fault, and about 800 t of additional gold reserves have been identified in the Jiaojia metallogenic belt. To date, about 1400 t of accumulative gold resource reserves have been identified. The main ore body of the Shaling gold mine in Laizhou has a controlled length of up to 1920 m, a maximum along-dip depth of 2180 m, and an elevation of –940 m to –2020 m. Further, 389 t of gold resources have been identified in the mine at an average grade of 3.41×10 ZK01 has revealed that the Jiaojia Fault Belt dips more gently toward the deep part and is an upper-steep and lower-gentle shovel-like fault, dipping at about 25° and about 20° at vertical depths of 2000 m and 2850 m, respectively. The belt thickness increases from about 500 m in the shallow portion to more than 800 m in the depth direction, where the mineralized alteration becomes more complex. From the margin toward the center, the degree of fracturing and alteration first increases and then alternates between increasing and decreasing. The belt zoning becomes complex, transitioning from simple and symmetric to asymmetric ( According to sample data collected from ZK01, the characteristics of the main rock formations from the surface downward are as follows. 0–28.70 m: Linyi-Formation pebbled loam and loam of Quaternary. 28.70–1321.84 m: Xinzhuang-Unit tonalitic gneiss of the Qixia-Sequence and Luanjiazhai-Unit plagioclase amphibolite (meta-gabbro) of the Malianzhuang Sequence ( 1321.84–1390.94 m: Contact between Qixia-Sequence tonalitic gneiss and Cuizhao-Unit biotite adamellite of the Linglong Sequence ( 1390.94–2416.29 m: Cuizhao-Unit biotite-adamellite of the Late Yanshanian Linglong Sequence ( 2416.29–2466.44 m: An upper branch of the Jiaojia Fault Belt mainly containing beresitized cataclastic adamellite ( 2466.44–2549.59 m: Beresitized granitic cataclasite ( 2549.59–2801.34 m: Beresitized granitic cataclasite and cataclastic adamellite ( 2801.34–2801.58 m: Fault gouge and tectonic breccia, constituting the first fault gouge layer. The rock is colored off-grayish green to dark green, with a layered structure, and is about 5 cm thick. The tectonic breccia is composed mainly of quartz, with a grain size of about 1 cm. 2801.58–2810.89 m: Pyrite-bearing Cr-sericitized altered rock ( 2810.89–2824.39 m: Beresitized cataclastic biotite-adamellite ( 2824.39–2854.59 m: Beresitized rock and beresitized granitic cataclasite ( The characteristics described above correspond to the traditional hanging wall of the Jiaojia Fault fractured belt. 2854.59–2854.69 m: Fault gouge (the second fault gouge layer, main fracture plane) ( 2854.69–2876.89 m: Beresitized granitic cataclasite ( 2876.89–2965.79 m: Beresitized cataclastic adamellite intercalated with beresitized granitic cataclasite ( 2965.79–3111.93 m: Beresitized granitic porphyroclastic rock and granulitic rock. 3111.93–3234.16 m: Weakly beresitized cataclastic biotite-adamellite ( 3234.16–3266.06 m: Cataclastic porphyroid adamellite ( From the acquired ZK01 data, the Jiaojia Fault Belt was characterized at a depth interval of 2416.29 m to 3234.16 m, and six gold ore bodies were discovered at a depth interval of 2700.89 m to 2854.59 m ( The ore types in the deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt are similar to those in the central-shallow part, and the industrial ore type classification is low-S gold ore. The deposits in the belt are fractured alteration gold deposits, i.e., Jiaojia-type gold deposits. According to the fractured alteration intensity and main structural characteristics, the ore types can be divided into the following two categories: (1) Beresitized cataclasite and (2) beresitized cataclastic granite. (1) For the beresitized cataclasite ( The minerals associated with the deep-seated ores are divided into three types: (1) Residual minerals from protolith, such as plagioclase, K-feldspar, quartz, and biotite; (2) altered non-metallic minerals, including sericite, micro-grained quartz, K-feldspar, carbonate minerals, chlorite, and kaolinte; (3) metal minerals, including pyrite, galena, chalcopyrite, sphalerite, pyrrhotite, natural gold, and electrum, occasionally with local joseite and native bismuth. The natural gold are mainly distributed in pyrite and crystal fissures ( To investigate the useful and harmful components of the ore, excluding gold, deep ore composites were analyzed. Composite samples from different ore bodies were combined according to ore type, based on sample length ratio and using analysis duplicates. Seven composite samples were collected for analysis. The basic and composite analyses of the ore indicated that the useful components are dominated by gold and the associated components are dominated by Ag and S, which can be comprehensively recycled and utilized. The other component fractions are low and similar to those in medium-shallow ore bodies ( Electron probe analyses (JEOL, JXA8230) of the gold minerals in the main ore types ( Previous research has indicated that the alteration zoning of the shallow part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt is generally beresite-centered with outward beresitized granulitic rock, beresitized granitic porphyroclastic rock, and phyllic cataclastic granite ( The ZK01 deep borehole intersects various alteration types. The corresponding details are as follows. (1) Potassic alteration appears within the fault alteration zone, having an off-shallow flesh-pink color and vein-like and lumpy characteristics. This alteration occurs as unevenly distributed K-feldspar, replacing plagioclase, while the quartz in the granite and biotite has been replaced by sericite, yielding pseudomorphism. The plagioclase has been widely replaced by K-feldspar and has formed detached island residues ( Geological and petrographic research indicates that the geological characteristics of the ore bodies in the Jiaojia metallogenic belt share the following similarities in the depth direction: The gold ore (mineralization) layers are hosted in the tectonic alteration zone and the main ore bodies have developed along the main fracture plane of the Jiaojia Fault. The ore bodies are principally hosted in the beresitized cataclasite zone, locally extending into the beresitized granitic cataclasite zone. The more developed the fissures in the ore-hosting wall rocks, the denser the pyrite veinlets and the better the mineralization. Pyrite is the main gold-carrying mineral and the gold enrichment is related to the alteration intensity, generally, the higher the alteration, the better the mineralization. The ore bodies are stratiform, large-veinlike, or lenticular, and their attitudes are generally consistent with that of the main fracture plane. The ore bodies mostly exhibit divergence and convergence or swelling and shrinkage characteristics and have stable or relatively stable thicknesses, with evenly or relatively evenly distributed useful components. Further, thickness and grade are positively correlated. The metal sulfides are mostly disseminated, veinlet-like, stockwork, or veinlet-disseminated. The geological characteristics of the ore bodies at different depths have the following differences: Shallow ore bodies are located below the main fracture plane and minor deep ore bodies are above the plane; the ore-body dip angle decreases in the depth direction; the ore body scale and thickness tend to first increase, with a maximum occurring between –900 m and –2030 m elevation, and then decrease with a tendency towards stability in the depth direction; the gold grade of the ore tends to decrease. The different characteristics of gold minerals at different depths ( According to the ore mineral composition, mineral paragenetic association, mineral cross-cutting relation, and ore texture structure, the deep gold mineralization alteration of ZK01 can be divided into four stages ( The Jiaojia Fault Belt has been recognized as China ’s largest gold belt in terms of gold resources/reserves and has significant potential about deep gold mineralization prospecting. In the 1970s, the discovery of an ultra-large “Jiaojia-type” gold deposit resulted in dramatic breakthroughs in gold metallogenic theory. As one of the most significant gold belts of northwestern Jiaodong, continuous breakthroughs have been made through prospecting of the deep second mineralization enrichment zone of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt over the past several years. These findings have identified Jiaojia as a Kilton giant gold deposit with 1400 t measured gold resources at a depth exceeding 2000 m. In this study, ZK01 has been successfully used to define the alteration and mineralization characteristics of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt at 3000 m depth. Note that this belt turns with a gentle dip at this depth. In addition, data gathered via ZK01 have been successfully analyzed to define the Jiaojia metallogenic belt at a depth interval of 2416.29 m to 3234.16 m. The thickness of the alteration zone is up to 817.87 m, and six new layers of gold ore bodies have been discovered. The accumulative ore intersection thickness is 20.87 m and the average gold grade is 1.85×10 Previous massive geological exploration revealed that the main ore bodies in the Jiaojia metallogenic belt are mainly hosted in two mineralized alteration zones, i.e., the beresite and beresitized granitic cataclasite near the footwall of the Jiaojia main fault. Through isotopic testing, ZK01 has revealed that the Jiaojia Fault Belt tends to dip gently in the depth direction, dipping at about 25° and about 20° at depths of 2000 m and 2850 m, respectively. The fracturing, alteration and mineralization, and tectonic type differ between the shallow and deep parts of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt. The deep part displays typical zoning from the interior to exterior, which generally consists of cataclastic granite, granite cataclasite, weakly beresitized granitic cataclasite, beresitized cataclasite, and fault gouge (zones). The various zones are usually in a relationship of gradual transition or occur alternately or repeatedly. According to the data obtained from the deep drillhole, in the deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt, beresite has only developed at the highest-intensity fracturing alteration position. This rock extends discontinuously and usually occurs as strips and lenses. The main mineralized alteration mechanisms include silification, pyritization, sericitization, beresitization, chloritization, carbonatization, and biotitization. Beresitization is most closely related to mineralization. Gold beresitization is the main mineralization stage, superimposed with the quartz-pyrite stage. The gold-quartz-polymetallic sulfide stage has not developed, and the late-stage corresponds to the quartz-barite carbonate stage. Compared to the shallow part, the deep part has gold ore bodies at lower grades and orebody thicknesses, but more intense silification. These characteristics indicate that the ore-forming element Si began to precipitate first, followed by gold precipitation. Note that Si precipitation indicates changes in physical and chemical conditions [T, P, Based on data obtained via deep drillhole ZK01, this paper reported the deep geological mineralization characteristics of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt at 3000 m depth, along with their implications. The main findings can be summarized as follows. The creation of ZK01 facilitated significant breakthroughs concerning deep prospecting of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt. Notably, this is China’s first drillhole with intersected hard-rock gold mineralization. Hence, the alteration and mineralization characteristics of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt at 3000 m depth were determined (the Jiaojia metallogenic belt dips more gently at 3000 m). In particular, the ZK01 borehole allowed successful characterization of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt at a depth interval of 2416.29 m to 3234.16 m. The alteration zone was found to be up to 817.87 m thick and six layers of gold ore bodies were discovered. The accumulative ore intersection thickness was determined to be 20.87 m and the average gold grade was determined to be 1.85×10 Analysis of ZK01 data has also revealed that the Jiaojia Fault Belt tends to dip gently in the depth direction, with dip angles of about 25° and about 20° at vertical depths of 2000 m and 3000 m, respectively. The fracturing, alteration and mineralization, and tectonic type differ between the shallow and deep parts of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt. The deep part exhibits typical zoning from the interior to the exterior generally consisting of cataclastic granite, granite cataclasite, weakly beresitized granitic cataclasite, beresitized cataclasite, and fault gouge (zones). The relationships between the various zones are in gradual transition or occur alternately and repeatedly. From the ZK01 intersection, the beresite of the deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt has only developed at the position corresponding to the most intense fracturing alteration. Further, this rock extends discontinuously and usually occurs as strips and lenses. Data obtained from ZK01 also indicate that the pyritized cataclastic granite-type ore in the deep part of the Jiaojia metallogenic belt has a mineralization intensity closely related to the degree of pyrite vein development; the higher the pyrite content, the wider the veins and the higher the gold grade. The deep gold ore has higher gold fineness than the shallow ore and contains joseite, tetradymite, and native bismuth, indicating a higher deep gold mineralization temperature and the presence of mantle-sourced material possibly involved in the mineralization. Finally, analysis of ZK01 data has revealed that the deep-seated orebodies are mainly located above the main fracture plane (fault gouge), which contradicts the previous understanding that the fault gouge blocked hydrothermal activity during mineralization and that the orebodies are located below the main fracture plane. Previous research has indicated that the shallow orebodies are typically hosted in the contact zone between the Linglong Granite and Jiaodong Group or meta-gabbro; however, the deep-seated orebodies are hosted far from this contact zone and within the Linglong Granite zone. This new knowledge is of great significance for the development of accurate prospecting models and the determination of favorable positions for deep prospecting, metallogenic prognosis, and resource potential evaluation. Xue-feng Yu and Da-peng Li developed the theoretical formalism, performed the analytic calculations. De-ping Yang, Wei Shan, Yu-Xin Xiong and Nai-jie Chi participated in the whole drilling project. Ke Geng and Peng-fei Wei provided critical feedback and helped shape the research, analysis and manuscript. Peng-rui Liu carried out the thin section identification. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the final manuscript. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This study was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41772076, 41672084, 41372086, 41503038), the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFC0600105-04, 2016YFC0600606), the Key Research and Development Program of Shandong Province (2017CXGC1601, 2017CXGC1602, 2017CXGC1603), and the Special Fund for “Taishan Scholars” Project of Shandong Province.