Effects of solid feed (SF) level and roughage-to-concentrate (R:C) ratio on ruminal drinking and passage kinetics of milk replacer, concentrate, and roughage were studied in veal calves. In total, 80 male Holstein-Friesian calves (45±0.2kg of body weight) were divided over 16 pens (5 calves per pen). Pens were randomly assigned to either a low (LSF) or a high (HSF) SF level and to 1 of 2 R:C ratios: 20:80 or 50:50 on a dry matter (DM) basis. Roughage was composed of 50% corn silage and 50% chopped wheat straw on a DM basis. At 27 wk of age, measurements were conducted in 32 calves. During the measurement period, SF intake was 1.2kg of DM/d for LSF and 3.0kg of DM/d for HSF, and milk replacer intake averaged 2.3kg of DM/d for LSF and 1.3kg of DM/d for HSF. To estimate passage kinetics of milk replacer, concentrate, and straw, indigestible markers (CoEDTA, hexatriacontane C36, Cr-neutral detergent fiber) were supplied with the feed as a single dose 4, 24, and 48h before assessment of their quantitative recovery in the rumen, abomasum, small intestine, and large intestine. Rumen Co recovery averaged 20% of the last milk replacer meal. Recoveries of Co remained largely unaffected by SF level and R:C ratio. The R:C ratio did not affect rumen recovery of C36 or Cr. Rumen fractional passage rate of concentrate was estimated from recovery of C36 in the rumen and increased from 3.3%/h for LSF to 4.9%/h for HSF. Rumen fractional passage rate of straw was estimated from Cr recovery in the rumen and increased from 1.3%/h for LSF to 1.7%/h for HSF. An increase in SF level was accompanied by an increase in fresh and dry rumen contents. In HSF calves, pH decreased and VFA concentrations increased with increasing concentrate proportion, indicating increased fermentation. The ratio between Cr and C36 was similar in the small and large intestine, indicating that passage of concentrate and straw is mainly determined by rumen and abomasum emptying. In conclusion, increasing SF level introduces large variation in passage kinetics of dietary components, predominantly in the rumen compartment. The SF level, rather than the R:C ratio, influences rumen recovery of concentrate and roughage. Our data provide insight in passage kinetics of milk (Co representing the milk replacer) and SF (Cr and C36 representing roughage and concentrate, respectively) and may contribute to the development of feed evaluation models for calves fed milk and SF.Provision of a minimum amount (50 to 250 This study was conducted at the research facilities of VanDrie group (Scherpenzeel, the Netherlands). Procedures complied with the Dutch Law on Experimental Animals and the ETS123 (Council of Europe 1985 and the 86/609/EEC Directive) and were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Wageningen University. Eighty male Holstein-Friesian calves (2 wk of age; 45 During the experimental period, calves were housed in groups of 5 calves in pens (3 The calves in the current study were selected from another experiment, which has been described by Daily DMI from MR during the measurement period is shown in The SF was prepared in a mixing wagon (Easymix 2, Vliebo, Veenendaal, the Netherlands), and provided as a mixture in a long feed trough in front of the pen directly after MR provision and collection of MR refusals. Solid feed refusals were removed and weighed once daily before the MR meal in the morning. During the experimental period, calves had free access to water provided via drinking nipples. During the 2-d measurement period (wk 27), calves were provided with water in buckets for 15 Milk replacer intake and SF intake were measured daily. Calves were weighed every 2 wk. Indigestible markers were used to estimate kinetics of MR, concentrate (hexatriacontane), and straw along the digestive tract of calves Passage kinetics were assessed by measuring the recovery of external markers from 4 compartments of the gastrointestinal tract at slaughter; reticulorumen, abomasum, small intestine, and large intestine. Each marker was provided as a pulse dose and in a proportionate mixture with the other SF components corresponding to the treatment. To assess passage kinetics of roughage, chromium-mordanted fiber straw with similar particle size of 3 At the end of the measurement period, calves were slaughtered at the experimental facilities over 2 consecutive slaughter days. Euthanasia by pentobarbital was directly followed by exsanguination. To avoid reflux of MR from the abomasum into the forestomachs at slaughter, calves were lifted by the forelegs immediately following exsanguination. Subsequently, ligations were made at the level of the thoracic entrance, the omasal-cardia of the abomasum, and the reticulo-omasal orifice. The gastrointestinal tract was divided into 4 segments: reticulorumen, abomasum, small intestine, and large intestine. The weight of each segment was recorded with and without contents. Rumen contents were quantitatively collected and solid and liquid phases were separated using a metal sieve (1.5 Samples of MR, concentrate, corn silage, and wheat straw were collected weekly. Corn silage samples were pooled monthly; other samples were pooled over the experimental period. Feed components (MR, corn silage, concentrate, straw) were analyzed for DM, ash, N, starch, NDF (except for MR), and crude fat content. For determination of DM content, corn silage and concentrate samples were freeze-dried. Concentrate, straw, and corn silage samples were ground to pass a 1-mm screen. Dry matter content was determined by drying to a constant weight according to ISO 6496 ( The Cr and Co concentrations were determined in the contents from each gastrointestinal compartment by atomic absorption spectrometry according to Rumen fractional passage rates were assumed constant and estimated for concentrate and straw from rumen recoveries of C The data set included 32 observations. For Co recovery, 8 calves were excluded because of MR refusals exceeding 10% (1 LSF 50:50; 5 LSF 20:80; 2 During the experimental period (wk 11 to 27), LSF calves consumed 93 Recovery of Co in the rumen averaged 20 At high SF intake, a low R:C ratio resulted in a 1-point lower pH ( From rumen recoveries of Cr and C Although the majority of MR is assumed to bypass the rumen by means of the esophageal groove reflex, ruminal drinking is frequently observed in veal calves ( Total Co recovery averaged 84%. The incomplete recovery indicates that CoEDTA may be partly absorbed. Although this marker has been used successfully to estimate passage kinetics ( From marker recovery data in the current study, we calculated fractional rumen passage rates assuming an exponential decay as commonly done in ruminant studies (e.g., The observed increase in ruminal fractional passage rate with increasing SF intake and decreasing MR intake was previously observed in dairy calves ( Ruminal fractional passage rates of concentrate are typically greater than those of roughages, such as straw ( The relationship between C In conclusion, the low passage rates found for concentrate and straw in the current study can be explained by the low SF intake (or high MR intake). An increase in SF intake coincided with an increase in rumen volume. The ratio between Cr and C Ruminal VFA concentrations observed in the current study were similar to VFA concentrations observed in growing calves and heifers provided with similar R:C ratios ( Ruminal drinking, as indicated from recovery of Co in the rumen, was not affected by SF intake and R:C ratio in veal calves. On average, 20% of the MR was recovered in the rumen. An increase in SF intake increased rumen passage rates of concentrates and straw as well as rumen volume. The differences in passage of concentrate and straw are mainly induced by variation in rumen and abomasum emptying, as indicated from the constant ratio between Cr (marker for straw) and C We thank Klaas Boeder, Bart Evers, Ewart van Voorst (VanDrie Group, Scherpenzeel, the Netherlands), Bert Beukers, André Jansen, Joswita van der Velde (Wageningen University, Wageningen, the Netherlands), Pieter Roskam, and Ralph Kok (Central Veterinary Institute, Lelystad, the Netherlands) for their skilled technical assistance. The Division for Earth and Life Sciences (ALW) of the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO, The Hague, the Netherlands), and the