To meet the high calcium (Ca) demand during eggshell biomineralization (2g of Ca per egg), laying hens develop specific metabolic regulations to maintain Ca homeostasis. The intake of Ca, its solubilization, and absorption capacity are enhanced at sexual maturity (SM). A better knowledge of the intestinal Ca transporters involved in their variations at this stage could indicate new nutritional strategies to enhance Ca digestive utilization. Transcellular Ca absorption pathway and its major player calbindin-D 28K (CALB1) mediate a saturable transport, which has been extensively described in this model. Conversely, a contribution by the paracellular pathway involving non-saturable Ca transport through intercellular tight junction has also been suggested. The aim of the present study was to identify candidate genes of these two pathways and their patterns of expression, in immature pullets (12, 15, and 17 wk old) and mature laying hens (23 wk old) in the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. Using RT-qPCR, this study identifies 3 new candidate genes for transcellular, and 9 for paracellular Ca transport. A total of 5 candidates of the transcellular pathway, transient receptor potential cation channels subfamily C member 1 (TRPC1) and M member 7 (TRPM7); CALB1 and ATPase plasma membrane Ca2+ transporting 1 (ATP2B1) and ATPase plasma membrane Ca2+ transporting 2 (ATP2B2) were enhanced with age or after SM in the duodenum, the jejunum or all 3 segments. A total of 4 candidates of the paracellular pathway Claudin 2 (CLDN2) and tight junction proteins 1, 2, and 3 (TJP1, TJP2 and TJP3) increased in the small intestine after SM. Additionally, CALB1, ATP2B2, and CLDN2 were overexpressed in the duodenum or the jejunum or both segments after SM. The enhanced expression of candidate genes of the paracellular Ca pathway after SM, supports that the non-saturable transport could be a mechanism of great importance when high concentrations of soluble Ca are observed in the intestinal content during eggshell formation. Both pathways may work cooperatively in the duodenum and jejunum, the main sites of Ca absorption in laying hens.In laying hens, eggshell formation represents a fast mineralization process, which takes place daily in the uterus, with the deposition of Calcium ( Controversies have also been raised about Duodenal CALB1 concentration correlates positively to the percentage of net Ca absorption, but negatively to the daily amount of Ca absorbed (Bar et al., In mammalian species, passive Ca transport relies on the paracellular pathway. It consists of intercellular tight junctions ( The objective of the present study was therefore to identify candidate genes of the transcellular and paracellular pathways and their patterns of expression in immature pullets (12, 15, and 17 wk of age) and mature laying hens (23 wk of age), in the 3 segments of the small intestine duodenum, jejunum and ileum. The experiment was conducted under the guidelines of the French Ministry of Agriculture for Animal Research at the Experimental Poultry Unit of Tours, INRA, Nouzilly, France (PEAT INRA 1295). The experimental design was approved by the Regional Ethics Committee on animal experimentation (Tours, France) and the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research (Paris, France; authorization: 10043). Animals had free access to water and feed, with diets adapted to their physiological status (Table Ten mature 20-wk-old laying hens from the same strain were placed in individual cages until 23 wk old, which represents the beginning of the peak of lay. They were subjected to 14L:10D light program. The hens were euthanized 9 to 10 h after ovulation, as measured by regular monitoring of oviposition (every 10 min), and the precise stage in the ovulatory cycle was confirmed based on the weight of the dried eggshell, as previously described (Nys et al., Six pullets per age at 12, 15, 17 wk old, and 7 laying hens at 23 wk old at the beginning of eggshell formation (9 to 10 h post-ovulation) were submitted to blood collection in the occipital sinus using heparin–lithium coated tubes. They were then euthanized by an intravenous injection of Dolethal (182 mg/ml, pentobarbital sodium, Vetoquinol, France). Blood was centrifuged immediately at 1000 g × 15 min for plasma collection and storage at −20°C for further analysis. The oviduct was removed and weighed for immature pullets. For each hen the duodenum, jejunum, and ileum were immediately removed and thoroughly washed with a cold PBS solution. A 4-cm sample was isolated at the rostral part of the respective segments: the duodenum, the jejunum, the ileum, scraped and snap-frozen into liquid nitrogen, prior to storage at −80°C until RNA extraction. Total plasma Ca and P concentrations were measured using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP OES ThermoscientificTM iCAPTM 7200; method 990.08; AOAC International, Candidate genes were selected according to their identification in previous studies on mammals or chickens (Fujita et al., Analysis of published RNAseq data on chicken gastro-intestinal tracts (Juanchich et al., Total RNA was extracted using the method of Chomczynski and Sacchi, ( High throughput real-time quantitative PCR was performed using the Biomark microfluidic system from Fluidigm, in which every sample-gene combination is quantified using 96.96 Dynamic Array IFCs (BMK-M-96.96, Fluidigm). Pre-amplification of the samples, chip loading and qRT-PCR were performed according to the manufacturer's protocol. Results were analyzed using the real-time PCR analysis software v.4.1.3 (Fluidigm). The relative mRNA quantification was performed with the ΔΔCt calculation method proposed by Pfaffl ( The 7 most stable HKG (out of 11) were chosen using GeNorm (Vandesompele et al., All statistical analyses were performed using R 3.4.0 software (R Core Team, 2017, Vienna, Austria). For plasma levels of total Ca, P, and vitamin D metabolites, the assumptions of the linear model were validated, and the data analyzed by one-way ANOVA, including the hen age as the main effect. Significant differences between means ( For mRNA expression, the normality of the data was checked by a quantile-quantile plot. Outliers, identified on the linear relationship between theoretical and sample percentiles, were removed from the dataset, resulting in a slight reduction in the number of samples for some genes in their experimental group. Changes in mRNA expression of candidate genes were analyzed with a linear mixed model (lme function) including the interaction between age and intestinal segment. The hen, considered as the experimental unit, was included as a random effect in the model. The interaction was removed from the model when it did not significantly affect mRNA expression. When significant differences were observed ( The effect of age on plasma levels of total Ca, P, and vitamin D metabolites are shown in Table The interaction between age and intestinal segment on mRNA expression of genes of the transcellular pathway is presented in Table For the remaining three candidates of the transcellular pathway, no interaction between age and segment was observed. The main effects of age and intestinal segment are presented in Figure The interaction between age and intestinal segment on mRNA expression of genes of the paracellular pathway is presented in Table For the remaining 5 candidates of the paracellular pathway, no interaction between age and segment was observed. The effects of age and intestinal segment are shown in Figure The interactions between age and intestinal segment on mRNA expression of vitamin D receptor ( In the present study, RT-qPCR was used to quantify mRNA expression of candidate genes of the transcellular and the paracellular Ca absorption pathways in the small intestine of laying hens. An integrative description of genes involved in Ca and P absorption in mature laying hens is provided in the Figure Sexual maturity in birds is a period of profound physiological modifications, linked to the onset of the reproductive function and marked by the first oviposition (García-Fernández et al., The present experiment provides the expression profile of 7 candidate genes of the transcellular Ca transport in addition to The high absorption of Ca in the small intestine of laying hens implies mechanisms for maintaining a low free intracellular concentration of Ca The output of Ca Phosphorus and Ca metabolisms are tightly linked and regulated by the same hormones (Kuro-o and Moe, The nuclear In birds, most dietary Ca is absorbed in the upper parts of the small intestine (the duodenum and jejunum), while the main site of absorption in mammals is the ileum (Bar, To conclude, this study identified 17 candidate genes of the transcellular and paracellular Ca transport pathways in the 3 distinct parts of the laying hen's small intestine at different ages, before and after SM, and suggested the importance of the paracellular pathway in Ca absorption. The present expression data sets the basis for future studies providing the final proof of their physiological relevance, though the detection of the corresponding proteins and the measure of their activity. Both transcellular and paracellular pathways may work cooperatively in the duodenum and the jejunum, the main sites of Ca absorption in laying hens. The non-saturable transport through the paracellular Ca pathway could be a mechanism of great importance in laying hens due to the high amount of soluble Ca in the intestine. The results also provide new insights to explain the differences in Ca absorption rates between the duodenum, jejunum and ileum in laying hens, through adaptations of the molecular repertoire of Ca transporters. The authors are grateful to Nathalie Même and Maryse Leconte (UMR BOA INRA Université de Tours, France) for their technical assistance, to Philippe Didier (UE PEAT INRA, France) for the care of experimental birds and Christelle Hennequet-Antier (UMR BOA INRA Université de Tours, France) for expert advice on statistical analysis. The research was supported by a research grant from Institut Carnot “ The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.