High-producing ruminants are commonly fed large amounts of concentrate to meet their high energy demands for rapid growth or high milk production. However, this feeding strategy can severely impair rumen functioning, leading to subacute ruminal acidosis. Subacute ruminal acidosis might have consequences for electrophysiological properties by changing the net ion transfer and permeability of ruminal epithelia, which may increase the uptake of toxic compounds generated in the rumen into the systemic circulation. The objective of the present study was to investigate the effects of excessive barley feeding on the electrophysiological and barrier functions of the ruminal epithelium and serum inflammation and ketogenesis markers after a long-term feeding challenge, using growing goats as a ruminant model. A feeding trial was carried out with growing goats allocated to 1 of the 3 groups (n=5–6 animals/group), with diets consisting exclusively of hay (control diet) or hay with 30 or 60% barley grain. Samples of the ventral ruminal epithelium were taken after euthanasia and instantly subjected to Ussing chamber experiments, where electrophysiological properties of the epithelium were measured in parallel with the permeability of marker molecules of different sizes [fluorescein 5(6)-isothiocyanate and horseradish peroxidase] from luminal to apical side. Additionally, ruminal fluid and blood samples were taken at the beginning of the experiment as well as shortly before euthanasia. Ruminal fluid samples were analyzed for volatile fatty acids and pH, whereas blood samples were analyzed for lipopolysaccharide, serum amyloid A, and β-hydroxybutyrate. Electrophysiological data indicated that barley feeding increased the epithelial short-circuit current compared with the control. Tissue conductance also increased with dietary barley inclusion. As shown with both marker molecules, permeability of ruminal epithelia increased with barley inclusion in the diet. Despite a lowered ruminal pH associated with increased volatile fatty acids (such as propionate and butyrate) concentrations as well as altered epithelial properties in response to high-grain feeding, no signs of inflammation became apparent, as blood serum amyloid A concentrations remained unaffected by diet. However, greater amounts of grain in the diet were associated with a quadratic increase in lipopolysaccharide concentration in the serum. Also, increasing the amounts of barley grain in the diet resulted in a tendency to quadratically augment serum concentrations of β-hydroxybutyrate and, hence, the alimentary ketogenesis. Further studies are needed to clarify the role of barley inclusion in the development of subacute ruminal acidosis in relation to ruminal epithelial damage and the translocation of toxic compounds in vivo.The intensive production systems of ruminants encourage the inclusion of large amounts of cereal grains or easily degradable byproducts in the diet to support high milk yields or rapid weight gain. Although these feeding practices might be helpful to enhance cost efficiency in the short term, they do not comply optimally with the ruminant's digestive physiology. The most important consequence thereof is a disturbed rumen ecosystem, which is often perceived in the form of a prolonged decline in ruminal pH to acidotic values <5.8, a rumen metabolic disorder commonly referred to as SARA ( Subacute ruminal acidosis is associated with important microbial and metabolic alterations that also affect the epithelial lining of the rumen ( Despite the importance of barrier function for systemic health, little data exist evaluating the effects of high-grain feeding and SARA on the electrophysiological characteristics and barrier function of the ruminal epithelium. Most of the studies conducted so far have evaluated the effects of in vitro acidic medium on the functionality of ruminal epithelia (Aschenbach and Gäbel 2000; The objective of the present study was to evaluate changes in the electrophysiological properties and barrier function of the ruminal epithelium, using growing goats after a long-term feeding challenge of excessive amounts of barley grain as an in vivo ruminant model. Long feeding periods are crucial to explain potential dietary effects on the functionality of the ruminal epithelia under in vivo conditions. Ruminal pH and the concentration of VFA were measured in the ruminal digesta to evaluate the fermentation characteristics in vivo and relate it to findings obtained in the Ussing chamber experiments. Additionally, clinical signs were evaluated and serum SAA and BHBA were used as indicators of APR and ketogenesis, respectively. The animal experimentation protocol of this research was approved by the institutional ethics committee of the University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna in accordance with Good Scientific Practice guidelines and national legislation (Protocol no. 15/03/97/2011). For the feeding trial, 1 female and 17 noncastrated male growing goats (6 Boer breed, 6 White German Noble breed, and 6 Toggenburg breed) were used at the experimental station of the Institute for Organic Farming and Biodiversity in Wels, Austria. Upon arrival, all goats were treated for internal parasites with Hapadex 5% (1.5 After this adaptation period, the animals were gradually switched to the experimental diets, which they received for another 6 Feed samples were collected regularly throughout the experiment and analyzed for the nutrient composition with proximate analysis. Samples were oven dried at 50°C for 48 After the animals were euthanized they were immediately opened and a sample of the ventral ruminal tissue (~50 Blood samples were collected on experimental d 1 (baseline sampling) and on the day of euthanasia shortly before feeding from the jugular vein using 10-mL blood-collection tubes (Vacuette; Greiner Bio-One GmbH, Kremsmünster, Austria). Serum was immediately separated by centrifugation at 1,800 × Animals were monitored throughout the experiment for health and distress problems from the veterinary technician. In addition, goats were subjected to a clinical examination on 5 different days during the experiment. Investigated clinical variables were pulse rate, rectal body temperature, ruminal contraction rate, and respiration rate. Pulse rate was recorded in the arteria femoralis. Breath rates and ruminal contractions were recorded using a stethoscope. Rectal temperature was measured using a digital thermometer (Thermoval; Paul Hartmann AG, Heidenheim, Germany). Furthermore, feces were evaluated by adopting a 3-scale fecal scoring system that ranged from score 1 (firm, normal feces) to score 3 (viscous, diarrhea). The electrophysiological properties and permeability of the ruminal epithelium were investigated with the isolated, intact ruminal epithelium using the Ussing chamber technique. In total, 6 incubation chambers were used per animal considered as repeated measurements. The abdominal cavity was opened by midline incision and the rumen and intestinal tract were carefully removed. The rumen was opened from the dorsal side. For the experiment, a ruminal wall tissue of approximately 50 Immediately after obtaining the ventral rumen epithelium, it was transferred into the transport buffer solution (39°C) and gassed with carbogen gas (95% O To measure epithelial permeability, fluorescein 5(6)-isothiocyanate ( All statistical analyses were carried out using PROC MIXED SAS (version 9.2; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). Before analysis, all data were tested for normality by evaluating the profile of their residuals using PROC UNIVARIATE of SAS. Data were submitted to ANOVA with a model accounting for the fixed effects of diet type and the random effect of animal. For the analyses of blood variables, baseline measurements taken at the beginning of experiment were used as covariates in the analysis of covariance. Data of the clinical health variables were submitted to ANOVA considering the diet type as fixed, the animal as a random effect, and the measurements recorded at different weeks were considered as repeated measures using a first-order autoregressive variance-covariance matrix. Data of the 3 Dietary effects on ruminal fluid and serum variables are presented in The serum data obtained by ANOVA revealed increased LPS concentrations quadratically, depending on dietary barley inclusion ( Results of the clinical examination are shown in The results of the Ussing chamber experiment regarding the electrophysiological characteristics and the permeability measurement of FITC and HRP markers across the ruminal epithelium are shown in Data of the flux of FITC from the mucosal to apical side of the rumen wall indicated a lower permeability with CTR compared with both barley-based diets ( In the present in vivo experiment, growing goats were assigned to 1 of the 3 treatment groups with increasing supplementation of barley grain. Inclusion of 60% barley in the diet significantly lowered ruminal pH, decreasing The linear decline in ruminal pH with increasing amounts of barley grain inclusion in the diet may partly be related to increased lactate production in the rumen in response to barley grain feeding ( Electrophysiological data, especially an increased capacity for net charge transfer (i.e., I Data also showed that SAA concentration in the serum remained unaffected despite lowered ruminal pH and higher serum LPS with LB and increased I Present findings of unchanged SAA concentrations agree with observations from previous similar studies in goats. For example, a recent study by Despite no clear signs of systemic inflammation, the ruminal epithelium was affected by barley feeding, as revealed by the results of the Ussing chamber experiment. Accordingly, the high barley inclusion in the diet increased I The ruminal barrier is crucial to prevent the translocation of LPS and other toxins or bacteria into the portal circulation ( Although the pH value was measured only on the last experimental day, one might assume a dietary effect throughout the experiment, meaning acidic ruminal conditions with the barley-based diets. Accordingly, after that time epithelial permeability was increased in the barley groups, probably as a result of epithelial damage due to low ruminal pH ( The I Clinical data of the present study showed that both pulse and respiration rate increased, in a linear fashion, in response to dietary barley inclusion. Although significant differences were observed compared with controls, the values reported for animals fed barley were within the normal clinical range and cannot be considered as abnormal and indicators of health disturbances. However, these findings indicate stress for the animals due to grain feeding, which has been observed earlier in cases of SARA in beef cattle ( The results of the present experiment demonstrate that, although feeding the HB diet over 6 The assistance of A. Dockner, M. Finsterböck, B. Glaser, C. von Reitzenstein, R. Tienken, S. Wetzels (Vetmeduni Vienna, Vienna, Austria), N. Jahan (Catholic