Objective:
                      Osteomalacia is a metabolic bone disease characterized by impaired mineralization with increased non-mineralized osteoid tissue, increased frailty, and reduced bone mineral density. A common cause of osteomalacia in adults and the elderly is severe deficiency of vitamin D, which leads to chronic hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism. The objective of this case report is to describe an unusual clinical presentation of osteomalacia, consisting of life-threatening acute hypocalcemia.
                  
                     
                        Methods:
                      Clinical, laboratory, and imaging data are presented.
                  
                     
                        Results:
                      We report the case of a 65-year-old man that showed symptoms and signs of severe and prolonged hypocalcemia due to unrecognized vitamin D deficiency. He presented at the emergency room reporting abdominal pain and vomiting since the evening before. Blood tests showed increased levels of rhabdomyolysis markers, severe hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, hypomagnesemia, normal renal function, elevated levels of alkaline phosphatase, extremely high levels of parathyroid hormone, and hypovitaminosis D. Radiological skeletal features of bone demineralization and bone abnormalities suggestive of osteomalacia were additionally detected. Other secondary causes of hypocalcemia were excluded. Clinical and biochemical resolution were progressively obtained only after an intramuscular loading dose of cholecalciferol was added to the standard calcium intravenous replacement therapy.
                  
                     
                        Conclusion:
                      This case report shows that osteomalacia consequent to a severe vitamin D deficiency can present with acute symptoms and signs of severe hypocalcemia requiring hospital admission. In such cases, vitamin D administration, and not intensive calcium supplementation alone, is essential to achieve clinical resolution of symptoms and normalization of mineral metabolism parameters.
                  
                     Abbreviations: 25-OH-D 25-hydroxyvitamin D CT computed tomography IV intravenous PTH parathyroid hormoneOsteomalacia is a metabolic bone disease characterized by impaired mineralization of newly formed organic matrix. It can derive from a number of conditions including vitamin D deficiency, malnutrition, intestinal malabsorption (e.g. celiac disease), chronic liver and kidney disease, renal tubular disorders, phosphate depletion, acidosis, use of certain drugs, and neoplasms ( Typical biochemical hallmarks of osteomalacia include low levels of 25-OH-D, normal to low serum calcium, low phosphate, high levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH), and high levels of alkaline phosphatase and osteocalcin ( Of note, acute hypocalcemia is not typically reported as a clinical feature of osteomalacia. Here we report the case of an elderly patient with unrecognized osteomalacia who developed clinical manifestations of severe treatment-resistant hypocalcemia, and we briefly discuss our diagnostic approach and clinical management. A 65-year-old man came to the emergency room of the Policlinico Tor Vergata University Hospital in Rome, Italy, for abdominal pain and vomiting arisen from the evening before, associated with constipation over the previous week. Of note, physical examination revealed the presence of persistent paresthesias and difficulty moving the arms, especially the hands. The patient's Trousseau sign was bilaterally positive, with flexed wrist and metacarpophalangeal joints, extended interphalangeal joints, and adducted thumbs after the cuff was inflated. No ongoing medications were reported. Blood tests showed severe hypocalcemia (albumin-adjusted serum calcium was 4.9 mg/dL) and hypophosphatemia (inorganic phosphate was 1.8 mg/dL), normal renal and liver function, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (453 IU/L), and increased rhabdomyolysis biomarkers (creatine phosphokinase was 5,267 IU/L; myoglobin was 7,027 ng/mL). Electrocardiogram at admission showed slightly prolonged QT interval (440 msec). A computed tomography (CT) scan was negative for abdominal acute events. The reference ranges for the parameters tested are given in In light of these findings, intravenous (IV) saline was promptly initiated to reduce the risks of diffuse rhabdomyolysis and acute renal impairment, along with 10% calcium gluconate infusion (4 g of elemental calcium within the first 36 hours). This lead to partial recovery of symptoms including electrocardiogram signs and rhabdomyolysis markers, but no significant improvements in albumin-adjusted calcium and inorganic phosphate levels. Additionally, extremely high intact PTH (649 pg/mL) was detected. Upon admission at our endocrinology unit, the patient reported a history of frailty, social deprivation, past alcohol abuse, and recent surgery for prosthetic left knee due to a road accident, which prevented him from ambulating. Despite continuous intensive IV administration of 10% calcium gluconate (up to 9 g/day), albumin-adjusted calcium levels were persistently low (6.1 mg/dL after 3 days of treatment) with urinary calcium excretion toward the lower limit of the normal range (70.2 mg/day) and normalization of serum inorganic phosphate (3.5 mg/dL). Low magnesium levels were also detected (1.4 mg/dL), along with evidence of caloric malnutrition (pre-albumin 10 mg/dL; retinol-binding protein 1 mg/dL; transferrin 133 mg/dL; blood lymphocytes 1,550/μl, 17.9% of total white blood cells). Mineral metabolism assessment confirmed the high levels of PTH (649 pg/mL), alongside severely impaired vitamin D status (25-OH-D 6.3 ng/mL) and increased biomarkers of bone neoformation (osteocalcin 104 ng/mL; bone alkaline phosphatase 105 μg/L). Over the following days, calcium levels did not substantially increase, despite further intensification of calcium IV supplementation and introduction of oral calcitriol (up to 1 μg/daily) and IV magnesium sulfate (1 g/day, corresponding to 20 mEq of elemental magnesium/day). Meanwhile, potential causes of severe hypocalcemia were investigated. The so-called “hungry bone syndrome”, which is frequently associated with acute hypocalcemia, was excluded since neither thyroidectomy nor parathyroidectomy were reported in the medical history ( Skeletal survey showed widespread joint degeneration around the cervical spine with reduction of interbody spaces, marked accentuation of the dorsal kyphosis, decreased bone mineralization, remarkable diminution of the opacity of the long bones in the arms, and a varus attitude of the first foot ray bilaterally. These radiologic skeletal features were highly suggestive of osteomalacia, although not fully diagnostic as the characteristic pseudofractures of osteomalacia were not described ( To address this issue, neck ultrasonography followed by parathyroid scintigraphy with technetium (99mTc) sestamibi was performed, excluding the presence of hyperfunctional autonomous parathyroid tissue. Pseudohypoparathyroidism was also excluded given the lack of typical somatic features of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, lack of hyperphosphatemia, and impaired responses of the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid, hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal, and hypothalamic-pituitary-growth axes, which are common expressions of the resistances to multiple hormones observed in that syndrome ( Since no alternative causes for severe hypocalcemia other than vitamin D deficiency were detected, mineral replacement therapies were supplemented with cholecalciferol supplementation (intramuscular loading dose of 300,000 IU) ( Severe vitamin D deficiency is recognized as the most frequent cause of osteomalacia worldwide ( Our patient presented to the emergency room because of acute abdominal pain and vomiting associated with features of rhabdomyolysis. Although adequate IV calcium supplementation was promptly initiated, substantial recovery from hypocalcemia was achieved only after cholecalciferol administration, suggesting that calcium supplementation alone could not be fully effective in such cases. The management of this clinical case suggests some additional considerations. First, vitamin D deficiency should be suspected and routinely investigated in elderly patients presenting with otherwise unexplainable hypocalcemia. Second, vitamin D deficiency, especially when sustained for a long period of time, can lead to a markedly impaired bone mineralization, resulting in a sort of “hungry bone syndrome” which is unlikely to be resolved with calcium supplementation alone ( Apart from clinical management of the acute disease, early detection of vitamin D deficiency with its related complications could play a crucial role in a significant number of the population. For example, chronic mild to moderate hypocalcemia may be suddenly worsened by various unexpected occurrences (e.g. concomitant use of certain drugs). Accordingly, clinical practice guidelines released by the Endocrine Society ( This case report showed that severe vitamin D deficiency in an elderly and frail individual, which is frequently asymptomatic, can additionally lead to marked skeletal mineralization abnormalities affecting routine daily activities, along with life-threatening hypocalcemia requiring hospitalization. Screening programs for the early diagnosis of hypovitaminosis D, especially in frail, elderly people, could help to prevent these life-threatening complications, as well as chronic bone injuries related to osteomalacia. The authors have no multiplicity of interest to disclose.