Adequate design of engineered barriers, including canister, buffer and backfill, is important for the safe disposal of high-level radioactive waste. Three-dimensional computer simulations were carried out under different condition to examine the thermal and mechanical behavior of engineered barriers and rock mass. The research looked at five areas of importance, the effect of the swelling pressure, water content of buffer, density of compacted bentonite, emplacement type and the selection of failure criteria. The results highlighted the need to consider tensile stress in the outer shell of a canister due to thermal expansion of the canister and the swelling pressure from the buffer for a more reliable design of an underground repository system. In addition, an adequate failure criterion should be used for the buffer and backfill.Compacted bentonite Dry density :1,800kg/m Thickness : 0.5 m Temperature < 100°C Crushed rock 70% + bentonite 30% Grain size < 22mm Crystalline rock (granite) Depth 500m Thermal gradient : 30°C/km Drill and blasting Tunnel spacing : 40m Underground area : 8km Tunnel length : 251m Width 5m, height 6.15m Total number : 700 tunnels Vertical emplacement Total number : 11,944 holes Spacing : PWR 6m, CANDU 4m Diameter :2.22m Dry 1800 Wet 2100 Dry 1800 Wet 2100  K  K Deep geological disposal in an underground rock mass is generally considered the most reliable and technically feasible way for the permanent disposal of High-Level radioactive Wastes (HLW). In an underground repository, the waste will be inserted in corrosion resistant canisters and be transported to disposal tunnels located several hundred meters underground. The deposition holes of the disposal tunnel will be excavated vertically in the floor or horizontally in the wall. The canister will be located in the center of the deposition hole with the surrounding buffer material. Normally, the open space of the disposal tunnel will be backfilled with suitable materials after canister installation. In Korea, more than 11,000 tons of spent fuel has already been produced from the 21 nuclear power plants currently operating in four sites. The safe and reliable management of HLW is a national issue for the sustainable utilization of nuclear energy. Similar to other nuclear advanced countries[ The KRS is based on the utilization of compacted bentonite as a major engineered barrier The properties of compacted bentonite had been investigated by previous studies. For example, Cho et al. Bentonite produced in Kyungju area will be compacted to make blocks for easy installation and to ensure the performance of the buffer. Kyungju bentonite is a Ca bentonite with approximately 70% montmorillonite The annulus of 0.5m between the canister and the hole surface will be filled with the compacted bentonite. The open space of the disposal tunnel will be backfilled with a mixture of 70% crushed rock and 30% bentonite. Using available measured buffer and backfill properties, the long term performance of engineered barriers under geological disposal conditions has been investigated using computer simulations. For instance, thermal analysis of an underground HLW repository and thermo-mechanical analysis for a multi-level concept was already carried out In the present study, the thermal-mechanical coupling behavior in an underground HLW repository was analyzed to better understand the effects of the swelling pressure, water content in a buffer, selection of a plastic model, and the direction of the deposition hole on the stability of the canister, buffer, backfill and rock using three-dimensional computer models. In order to do that, the thermal and mechanical properties of the materials including the failure criteria of the buffer required for the complex modeling were determined. The canister, buffer, and backfill are major engineered barriers used for the prevention of environmental contamination resulting from the release of the radioactive materials from waste after closure of the repository. Among the engineered barriers, the performance of the buffer is extremely important for achieving long term safety. Therefore, it is strongly recommended to use a material that can retain its thermal, hydraulic and mechanical capacities under harsh conditions, such as high temperatures, high pressures and high radiation levels expected in deposition holes. The unique properties of compacted bentonite as mentioned earlier are adequate for achieving the following roles of the buffer: As a hydraulic buffer, it is important to have low hydraulic conductivity to retard the groundwater infiltration from the rock. The hydraulic conductivity of a bentonite block decreases with increasing density after compaction. In the deposition hole, the confining effect of the surrounding rock will also reduce the hydraulic conductivity when the bentonite blocks become saturated with water groundwater and swell. As a mechanical barrier, the buffer needs to have the mechanical properties required to protect the canister from an impact or loading related to sudden movement or a steady time dependent displacement from the surrounding rock mass. It is also important that the buffer can hold the canister in the original position without serious displacement. When the bentonite buffer becomes saturated with groundwater, it acts as an elastic-plastic material that can effectively protect the canister from fractured rock movement. The swelling of bentonite expected with the suction of water can help enhance the mechanical and hydraulic stability by filling the fractures around the deposition holes. One of the most critical design criteria for a HLW repository is the peak temperature at the interface of canister and buffer. To ensure the performance of bentonite buffer, the repository needs to be designed to ensure that the peak temperature is lower than 100°C. The buffer should be a good thermal conductor to transfer the heat effectively from the waste to the rock. The radioactive materials can escape from the repository if the canister containing HLW malfunctions for some reason, such as corrosion or rupture and a pathway is available from the canister location to the surface. In such a situation, a low diffusion coefficient of buffer will be helpful in retarding the release rate of radioactive materials until substantial radioactive decay has occurred. The above-listed properties are of relevance to many international programs examining options for deep geological disposal of HLW. As a result, in situ experiments, such as FEBEX (Full scale Engineered Barrier EXperiment) Although located a greater distance from the canister, the roles of backfill are similar to those of the buffer except for the mechanical protection of a canister. Backfill, however, does not necessarily need to have the same functional capabilities expected in the buffer, but for the KRS it is recommended to be able to sustain the severe pressure from the buffer-filled deposition hole and the adjacent rock. For backfill, different options involving combinations of bentonite, crushed rock and sand have been developed. Cho et al. Thermal conductivity, K(w/m°K) -buffer with a dry density of 1800kg/m -backfill with a water content(w) of 17% : K = 2.04 Specific heat, C(kJ/kg°K) -buffer with a dry density of 1800kg/m -backfill : C=(34.1+4.18 w) / (100+w) The thermal expansion coefficient of the buffer with a dry density of 1200-1600 kg/m When the dry density of bentonite is more than 1600 kg/m The mechanical properties, such as compressive strength, elastic modulus, cohesion, Poisson's ratio and angle of internal friction were measured from laboratory tests using compacted Kyungju bentonite under a range of test conditions. The buffer and backfill are inevitably under a load from excessive pressure, thermal stress, hydraulic pressure and swelling pressure. The pressure from the surrounding rock and groundwater at several hundred meters is quite high compared to the strength of the buffer and backfill. Furthermore, there will be a stress concentration at certain locations due to a stress redistribution after excavating the tunnel and deposition hole. The stress redistribution pattern depends on the initial stress condition, rock properties and repository design. Under severe loading conditions, the buffer and backfill will behave as plastic materials. To predict their elastic-plastic behavior, adequate failure criteria should be defined using triaxial compression tests. In this study, the failure criteria of the buffer and backfill were determined from triaxial compression tests under different conditions, as listed in Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion Tresca failure criterion Von Mises failure criterion Drucker-Prager failure criterion where, τ is the shear stress, C is the cohesion, ϕ is the normal stress, ϕ is the angle of internal friction, ϕ In the model, the thermal and mechanical properties required for Thermal-Mechanical analysis were determined under the assumption of a buffer containing 17% water and a compacted density of 1800kg/m Heat loss through the surface was considered with the heat convection coefficient of 0.7 W/m where E and In this study, it was assumed that PWR spent fuel with a burn up of 45,000MWd/tHM is disposed in a 500m deep underground. The decay heat from the PWR spent fuel with time can be calculated using the following equation: where t is the cooling time(years) after release from the reactor. The assumption in this model was that four assemblies are to be inserted in a single canister after allowing 40 years of cooling. Since the model focuses mainly on investigating the behavior of the engineered barriers, the complex structures and properties of the spent fuel and cast iron inside the canister can be simplified as a uniformly mixed inner part. The mean thermal and mechanical properties of the inner part of the canister were determined at a volume ratio between the fuel part and cast iron part. The outer shell of the canister is made of corrosion resistant metal with a density of 8000 kg/m The initial in situ stress condition was considered to be hydrostatic, based on the measurements that showed the stress ratio was about 1.0 at 500m depth. The temperature distribution in the model was calculated with the geothermal gradients of 37.5°C/km measured at the Kosung site  FLAC3D is a commercial code adapting fast Lagrangian analysis provided by Itasca Consulting Group and widely used in various civil and mining engineering projects. Using finite-difference method(FDM), which is suitable for large, non-linear problem which may involve collapse or progressive failure, FLAC3D can offer a wide range of capabilities to solve thermal, mechanical, and hydraulic problems. It also contains a powerful built-in programming language FISH, that allows the users to define new variables and functions. In this study, therefore, the non-linear plastic behavior expected in buffer and backfill under disposal conditions was solved using FLAC3D 3.2  Thermal behavior  Mechanical behavior The stress distribution is important for understanding the mechanical stability of the disposal system. where, ϕ The thermal and mechanical results in 50 years were compared to examine the effects of the design parameters used in different cases. In each case, the maximum buffer temperature was reached before 50 years, as shown in Compared to the cases for vertical emplacement, the case for horizontal emplacement showed a slightly lower peak temperature and slow arrival time to the peak value in the buffer and rock. This was attributed to the difference in the length of the deposition hole. Since it was not needed to consider the effects of backfill in a long horizontal deposition hole concept, the decay heat might be dispersed more easily through the rock. The peak rock temperatures in all of these cases were similar. This means that the variations in the design of an engineered barrier will have less effect on the peak rock temperature compared to the peak buffer temperature.    In an underground HLW repository, where there is high in situ stress and hydraulic stress several hundred meters deep underground, thermal stress related to the decay heat from the waste and swelling pressure from the buffer are expected over a long period of time. For optimal design of the repository system, the effect of the design parameters should be analyzed carefully considering the possible loading conditions. In this study, the thermal and mechanical behavior of the engineered barriers including the canister, buffer and backfill, and natural barrier under the expected loading conditions in the KRS were modeled using three-dimensional computer code, FLAC3D. For the computer simulation, the thermal and mechanical properties of the buffer, backfill, canister and rock were derived from previous studies. Furthermore, the parameters in various failure criteria could be determined from the triaxial compression tests for the buffer and backfill made from Kyungju bentonite under different testing conditions. For a more reliable simulation, the rock properties and in situ conditions measured at the Kosung site in Kangwon province were used. From the simulation for different cases, the effect of the emplacement type, swelling pressure, plastic model, and water content in the buffer on the stability of engineered and natural barriers could be investigated. From this study, the following conclusions could be drawn: Careful selection of the material type and manufacturing technique of the canister is needed because a significantly high tensile stress along the axial direction of the outer shell of the canister is possible due to thermal expansion of the canister. This is especially true when the outer shell and fuel components are tightly contacted. The tensile stress on the outer shell can be reduced considering the swelling pressure from the compacted buffer. The swelling pressure effect should be included for more detailed modeling in the future. The water content and density of bentonite should be considered as important design parameters because these significantly affect the thermo-mechanical behavior of the engineered barriers. In the cases of vertical disposal in the tunnel floor, a peak buffer temperature of approximately 95°C can develop within 20 years after emplacement. On the deposition hole surface, the peak rock temperature was approximately 10°C lower than the peak buffer temperature, and the peak time was also delayed to 40 years. The horizontal emplacement case showed a lower peak temperature and slow arrival time to the peak values. The decay heat might be dispersed more easily through the rock mass, because the influence of backfill can be neglected in a long horizontal deposition hole concept. Depending on the water content and buffer density, the peak buffer temperature was changed from 92°C to 98°C. In contrast, there was much less influence on the peak rock temperature. Although the same laboratory results were used to drive the parameters for the plastic models used in the model, the mechanical behaviors were different. Therefore, it is important to use appropriate plastic models for the buffer and backfill materials. This work was supported by Inha University Research Grant(INHA-44095-1) and Nuclear Research & Development Program of the National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MEST).